4
SECTION 1
CHAPTER 1 Basic structure and function of cells
Epithelial cells rarely operate independently of each other and commonly
form aggregates by adhesion, often assisted by specialized intercellular
junctions. They may also communicate with each other either
by generating and detecting molecular signals that diffuse across intercellular
spaces, or more rapidly by generating interactions between
membrane-bound signalling molecules. Cohesive groups of cells constitute
tissues, and more complex assemblies of tissues form functional
systems or organs.
Most cells are between 5 and 50 m in diameter: e.g. resting lymphocytes
are 6 m across, red blood cells 7.5 m and columnar epithelial
cells 20 m tall and 10 m wide (all measurements are approximate).
Some cells are much larger than this: e.g. megakaryocytes of the bone
marrow and osteoclasts of the remodelling bone are more than 200 m
in diameter. Neurones and skeletal muscle cells have relatively extended
shapes, some of the former being over 1 m in length.
CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Each cell is contained within its limiting plasma membrane, which
encloses the cytoplasm. All cells, except mature red blood cells, also
contain a nucleus that is surrounded by a nuclear membrane or envelope
(see Fig. 1.1; Fig. 1.2). The nucleus includes: the genome of the
cell contained within the chromosomes; the nucleolus; and other subnuclear
structures. The cytoplasm contains cytomembranes and several
membrane-bound structures, called organelles, which form separate
CELL STRUCTURE
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CELLS
The shapes of mammalian cells vary widely depending on their interactions
with each other, their extracellular environment and internal
structures. Their surfaces are often highly folded when absorptive or
transport functions take place across their boundaries. Cell size is
limited by rates of diffusion, either that of material entering or leaving
cells, or that of diffusion within them. Movement of macromolecules
can be much accelerated and also directed by processes of active transport
across the plasma membrane and by transport mechanisms within
the cell. According to the location of absorptive or transport functions,
apical microvilli (Fig. 1.1) or basolateral infoldings create a large
surface area for transport or diffusion.
Motility is a characteristic of most cells, in the form of movements
of cytoplasm or specific organelles from one part of the cell to another.
It also includes: the extension of parts of the cell surface such as pseudopodia,
lamellipodia, filopodia and microvilli; locomotion of entire
cells, as in the amoeboid migration of tissue macrophages; the beating
of flagella or cilia to move the cell (e.g. in spermatozoa) or fluids overlying
it (e.g. in respiratory epithelium); cell division; and muscle contraction.
Cell movements are also involved in the uptake of materials from
their environment (endocytosis, phagocytosis) and the passage of large
molecular complexes out of cells (exocytosis, secretion).
Fig. 1.1 The main structural components and internal organization of a generalized cell.
Plasma membrane
Actin filaments
Vesicle
Golgi apparatus
Intermediate
filaments
Mitochondrion
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Peroxisomes
Cytosol
Surface invagination
Surface projections
(cilia, microvilli)
Cell junctions
Desmosome
Microtubules
Centriole pair
Nuclear envelope
Nucleus
Ribosome
Nucleolus
Lysosomes
Cell surface folds
Nuclear poreCell structure
5
CHAPTER 1
charides and polysaccharides are bound either to proteins (glycoproteins)
or to lipids (glycolipids), and project mainly into the extracellular
domain (Fig. 1.3).
In the electron microscope, membranes fixed and contrasted by
heavy metals such as osmium tetroxide appear in section as two densely
stained layers separated by an electron-translucent zone  the classic
unit membrane. The total thickness of each layer is about 7.5 nm. The
overall thickness of the plasma membrane is typically 15 nm. Freezefracture
cleavage planes usually pass along the hydrophobic portion of
the bilayer, where the hydrophobic tails of phospholipids meet, and
split the bilayer into two leaflets. Each cleaved leaflet has a surface and
a face. The surface of each leaflet faces either the extracellular surface
(ES) or the intracellular or protoplasmic (cytoplasmic) surface (PS). The
extracellular face (EF) and protoplasmic face (PF) of each leaflet are
artificially produced during membrane splitting. This technique has
also demonstrated intramembranous particles embedded in the lipid
bilayer; in most cases, these represent large transmembrane protein
molecules or complexes of proteins. Intramembranous particles are
distributed asymmetrically between the two half-layers, usually adhering
more to one half of the bilayer than to the other. In plasma membranes,
the intracellular leaflet carries most particles, seen on its face
(the PF). Where they have been identified, clusters of particles usually
represent channels for the transmembrane passage of ions or molecules
between adjacent cells (gap junctions).
Biophysical measurements show the lipid bilayer to be highly fluid,
allowing diffusion in the plane of the membrane. Thus proteins are able
to move freely in such planes unless anchored from within the cell.
Membranes in general, and the plasma membrane in particular, form
boundaries selectively limiting diffusion and creating physiologically
distinct compartments. Lipid bilayers are impermeable to hydrophilic
solutes and ions, and so membranes actively control the passage of ions
and small organic molecules such as nutrients, through the activity of
membrane transport proteins. However, lipid-soluble substances can
pass directly through the membrane so that, for example, steroid hormones
enter the cytoplasm freely. Their receptor proteins are either
cytosolic or nuclear, rather than being located on the cell surface.
Plasma membranes are able to generate electrochemical gradients
and potential differences by selective ion transport, and actively take up
or export small molecules by energy-dependent processes. They also
provide surfaces for the attachment of enzymes, sites for the receptors
and distinct compartments within the cytoplasm. Cytomembranes
include the rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus,
as well as vesicles derived from them. Organelles include lysosomes,
peroxisomes and mitochondria. The nucleus and mitochondria
are enclosed by a double-membrane system; lysosomes and peroxisomes
have a single bounding membrane. There are also nonmembranous
structures, called inclusions, which lie free in the cytosolic
compartment. They include lipid droplets, glycogen aggregates and pigments
(e.g. lipofuscin). In addition, ribosomes and several filamentous
protein networks, known collectively as the cytoskeleton, are found in
the cytosol. The cytoskeleton determines general cell shape and supports
specialized extensions of the cell surface (microvilli, cilia, flagella).
It is involved in the assembly of specific structures (e.g. centrioles)
and controls cargo transport in the cytoplasm. The cytosol contains
many soluble proteins, ions and metabolites.
Plasma membrane
Cells are enclosed by a distinct plasma membrane, which shares features
with the cytomembrane system that compartmentalizes the cytoplasm
and surrounds the nucleus. All membranes are composed of
lipids (mainly phospholipids, cholesterol and glycolipids) and proteins,
in approximately equal ratios. Plasma membrane lipids form a
lipid bilayer, a layer two molecules thick. The hydrophobic ends of each
lipid molecule face the interior of the membrane and the hydrophilic
ends face outwards. Most proteins are embedded within, or float in, the
lipid bilayer as a fluid mosaic. Some proteins, because of extensive
hydrophobic regions of their polypeptide chains, span the entire width
of the membrane (transmembrane proteins), whereas others are only
superficially attached to the bilayer by lipid groups. Both are integral
(intrinsic) membrane proteins, as distinct from peripheral (extrinsic)
membrane proteins, which are membrane-bound only through their
association with other proteins. Carbohydrates in the form of oligosac-
Fig. 1.2 The structural organization and some principal organelles of a
typical cell. This example is a ciliated columnar epithelial cell from human
nasal mucosa. The central cell, which occupies most of the field of
view, is closely apposed to its neighbours along their lateral plasma
membranes. Within the apical junctional complex, these membranes form
a tightly sealed zone (tight junction) that isolates underlying tissues from,
in this instance, the nasal cavity. Abbreviations: AJC, apical junctional
complex; APM, apical plasma membrane; C, cilia; Cy, cytoplasm; EN,
euchromatic nucleus; LPM, lateral plasma membrane; M, mitochondria;
MV, microvilli; N, nucleolus. (Courtesy of Dr Bart Wagner, Histopathology
Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK.)
C MV
M
Cy
LPM
N
EN
M
APM
AJC
Fig. 1.3 The molecular organization of the plasma membrane, according
to the fluid mosaic model of membrane structure. Intrinsic or integral
membrane proteins include diffusion or transport channel complexes,
receptor proteins and adhesion molecules. These may span the thickness
of the membrane (transmembrane proteins) and can have both
extracellular and cytoplasmic domains. Transmembrane proteins have
hydrophobic zones, which cross the phospholipid bilayer and allow the
protein to float in the plane of the membrane. Some proteins are
restricted in their freedom of movement where their cytoplasmic domains
are tethered to the cytoskeleton.
Receptor
protein
Lipid bilayer
appearance
in electron
microscope
Internal
(intracellular)
surface
Carbohydrate
residues
Transmembrane
protein
Intrinsic
membrane
protein
Transport
or diffusion
channel
Extrinsic
protein
Transmembrane
pore complex
of proteins
External
(extracellular)
surface
Polar end of
phospholipid
Non-polar tail
of phospholipid
Cytoskeletal
elementBasic structure and function of cells
5.e1
CHAPTER 1
Combinations of biochemical, biophysical and biological techniques
have revealed that lipids are not homogenously distributed in
membranes, but that some are organized into microdomains in the
bilayer, called detergent-resistant membranes or lipid rafts, rich in
sphingomyelin and cholesterol. The ability of select subsets of proteins
to partition into different lipid microdomains has profound effects on
their function, e.g. in T-cell receptor and cellcell signalling. The highly
organized environment of the domains provides a signalling, trafficking
and membrane fusion environment.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
6
SECTION 1
abundant proteins; SER is abundant in steroid-producing cells and
muscle cells. A variant of the endoplasmic reticulum in muscle cells is
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, involved in calcium storage and release for
muscle contraction. For further reading on the endoplasmic reticulum,
see Bravo et al (2013).
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (see Fig. 1.4) is associated with
carbohydrate metabolism and many other metabolic processes, including
detoxification and synthesis of lipids, cholesterol and steroids. The
membranes of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum serve as surfaces for
the attachment of many enzyme systems, e.g. the enzyme cytochrome
P450, which is involved in important detoxification mechanisms and
is thus accessible to its substrates, which are generally lipophilic. The
membranes also cooperate with the rough endoplasmic reticulum
and the Golgi apparatus to synthesize new membranes; the protein,
carbohydrate and lipid components are added in different structural
compartments. The smooth endoplasmic reticulum in hepatocytes contains
the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase, which converts glucose-6-
phosphate to glucose, a step in gluconeogenesis.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum
The rough endoplasmic reticulum is a site of protein synthesis; its
cytosolic surface is studded with ribosomes (Fig. 1.5E). Ribosomes only
bind to the endoplasmic reticulum when proteins targeted for secretion
begin to be synthesized. Most proteins pass through its membranes and
accumulate within its cisternae, although some integral membrane proteins,
e.g. plasma membrane receptors, are inserted into the rough
endoplasmic reticulum membrane, where they remain. After passage
from the rough endoplasmic reticulum, proteins remain in membranebound
cytoplasmic organelles such as lysosomes, become incorporated
into new plasma membrane, or are secreted by the cell. Some carbohydrates
are also synthesized by enzymes within the cavities of the rough
endoplasmic reticulum and may be attached to newly formed protein
(glycosylation). Vesicles are budded off from the rough endoplasmic
reticulum for transport to the Golgi as part of the protein-targeting
mechanism of the cell.
Ribosomes, polyribosomes
and protein synthesis
Ribosomes are macromolecular machines that catalyse the synthesis of
proteins from amino acids; synthesis and assembly into subunits takes
place in the nucleolus and includes the association of ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) with ribosomal proteins translocated from their site of synthesis
in the cytoplasm. The individual subunits are then transported into the
cytoplasm, where they remain separate from each other when not
actively synthesizing proteins. Ribosomes are granules approximately
25 nm in diameter, composed of rRNA molecules and proteins assembled
into two unequal subunits. The subunits can be separated by their
sedimentation coefficients (S) in an ultracentrifuge into larger 60S and
smaller 40S components. These are associated with 73 different proteins
(40 in the large subunit and 33 in the small), which have structural
and enzymatic functions. Three small, highly convoluted rRNA strands
(28S, 5.8S and 5S) make up the large subunit, and one strand (18S) is
in the small subunit.
A typical cell contains millions of ribosomes. They may form groups
(polyribosomes or polysomes) attached to messenger RNA (mRNA),
which they translate during protein synthesis for use outside the system
of membrane compartments, e.g. enzymes of the cytosol and cytoskeletal
proteins. Some of the cytosolic products include proteins that can
be inserted directly into (or through) membranes of selected organelles,
such as mitochondria and peroxisomes. Ribosomes may be attached to
the membranes of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (see Fig. 1.5E).
In a mature polyribosome, all the attachment sites of the mRNA are
occupied as ribosomes move along it, synthesizing protein according
to its nucleotide sequence. Consequently, the number and spacing of
ribosomes in a polyribosome indicate the length of the mRNA molecule
and hence the size of the protein being made. The two subunits
have separate roles in protein synthesis. The 40S subunit is the site of
attachment and translation of mRNA. The 60S subunit is responsible
for the release of the new protein and, where appropriate, attachment
to the endoplasmic reticulum via an intermediate docking protein that
directs the newly synthesized protein through the membrane into the
cisternal space.
Golgi apparatus (Golgi complex)
The Golgi apparatus is a distinct cytomembrane system located near the
nucleus and the centrosome. It is particularly prominent in secretory
cells and can be visualized when stained with silver or other metallic
of external signals, including hormones and other ligands, and sites for
the recognition and attachment of other cells. Internally, plasma membranes
can act as points of attachment for intracellular structures, in
particular those concerned with cell motility and other cytoskeletal
functions. Cell membranes are synthesized by the rough endoplasmic
reticulum in conjunction with the Golgi apparatus.
Cell coat (glycocalyx)
The external surface of a plasma membrane differs structurally from
internal membranes in that it possesses an external, fuzzy, carbohydraterich
coat, the glycocalyx. The cell coat forms an integral part of the
plasma membrane, projecting as a diffusely filamentous layer 220 nm
or more from the lipoprotein surface. The cell coat is composed of the
carbohydrate portions of glycoproteins and glycolipids embedded in
the plasma membrane (see Fig. 1.3).
The precise composition of the glycocalyx varies with cell type; many
tissue- and cell type-specific antigens are located in the coat, including
the major histocompatibility complex of the immune system and, in
the case of erythrocytes, blood group antigens. Therefore, the glycocalyx
plays a significant role in organ transplant compatibility. The glycocalyx
found on apical microvilli of enterocytes, the cells forming the lining
epithelium of the intestine, consists of enzymes involved in the digestive
process. Intestinal microvilli are cylindrical projections (12 m
long and about 0.1 m in diameter) forming a closely packed layer
called the brush border that increases the absorptive function of
enterocytes.
Cytoplasm
Compartments and functional organization
The cytoplasm consists of the cytosol, a gel-like material enclosed by
the cell or plasma membrane. The cytosol is made up of colloidal proteins
such as enzymes, carbohydrates and small protein molecules,
together with ribosomes and ribonucleic acids. The cytoplasm contains
two cytomembrane systems, the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
apparatus, as well as membrane-bound organelles (lysosomes, peroxisomes
and mitochondria), membrane-free inclusions (lipid droplets,
glycogen and pigments) and the cytoskeleton. The nuclear contents,
the nucleoplasm, are separated from the cytoplasm by the nuclear
envelope.
Endoplasmic reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum is a system of interconnecting membranelined
channels within the cytoplasm (Fig. 1.4). These channels take
various forms, including cisternae (flattened sacs), tubules and vesicles.
The membranes divide the cytoplasm into two major compartments.
The intramembranous compartment, or cisternal space, is where secretory
products are stored or transported to the Golgi complex and cell
exterior. The cisternal space is continuous with the perinuclear space.
Structurally, the channel system can be divided into rough or granular
endoplasmic reticulum (RER), which has ribosomes attached to its
outer, cytosolic surface, and smooth or agranular endoplasmic reticulum
(SER), which lacks ribosomes. The functions of the endoplasmic
reticulum vary greatly and include: the synthesis, folding and transport
of proteins; synthesis and transport of phospholipids and steroids; and
storage of calcium within the cisternal space and regulated release into
the cytoplasm. In general, RER is well developed in cells that produce
Fig. 1.4 Smooth endoplasmic reticulum with associated vesicles. The
dense particles are glycogen granules. (Courtesy of Rose Watson, Cancer
Research UK.)Basic structure and function of cells
6.e1
CHAPTER 1
The glycocalyx plays a significant role in maintenance of the integrity
of tissues and in a wide range of dynamic cellular processes, e.g. serving
as a vascular permeability barrier and transducing fluid shear stress to
the endothelial cell cytoskeleton (Weinbaum et al 2007). Disruption of
the glycocalyx on the endothelial surface of large blood vessels precedes
inflammation, a conditioning factor of atheromatosis (e.g. deposits of
cholesterol in the vascular wall leading to partial or complete obstruction
of the vascular lumen).
Protein synthesis on ribosomes may be suppressed by a class of RNA
molecules known as small interfering RNA (siRNA) or silencing RNA.
These molecules are typically 2025 nucleotides in length and bind (as
a complex with proteins) to specific mRNA molecules via their complementary
sequence. This triggers the enzymatic destruction of the mRNA
or prevents the movement of ribosomes along it. Synthesis of the
encoded protein is thus prevented. Their normal function may have
antiviral or other protective effects; there is also potential for developing
artificial siRNAs as a therapeutic tool for silencing disease-related genes.Cell structure
7
CHAPTER 1
Fig. 1.5 The Golgi apparatus and functionally related organelles. A, Golgi apparatus (G) adjacent to the nucleus (N) (V, vesicle). B, A large residual body
(tertiary lysosome) in a cardiac muscle cell (M, mitochondrion). C, The functional relationships between the Golgi apparatus and associated cellular
structures. D, A three-dimensional reconstruction of the Golgi apparatus in a pancreatic  cell showing stacks of Golgi cisternae from the cis-face (pink)
and cis-medial cisternae (red, green) to the trans-Golgi network (blue, yellow, orangered); immature proinsulin granules (condensing vesicles) are
shown in pale blue and mature (crystalline) insulin granules in dark blue. The flat colour areas represent cut faces of cisternae and vesicles. E, Rough
endoplasmic reticulum (R), associated with the Golgi apparatus (G). (D, Courtesy of Dr Brad Marsh, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of
Queensland, Brisbane. A,B,E From human tissue, courtesy of Dr Bart Wagner, Histopathology Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK.)
M
Phagocytic pathway Secretory pathway Membrane recycling Receptor-mediated endocytosis
Early endosome
Late endosome
Secondary lysosome
Residual body
cis-Golgi network
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi cisternae
Vesicle shuttling
between cisternae
Lysosomal
fusion
Clathrin-coated pit
trans-Golgi network
A B
C
D E
G
V
N
G
R
GBasic str uct ure and function of ce lls
8
SECTION 1
Endocytic (internalization) pathway
The endocytic pathway begins at the plasma membrane and ends in
lysosomes involved in the degradation of the endocytic cargo through
the enzymatic activity of lysosomal hydrolases. Endocytic cargo is
internalized from the plasma membrane to early endosomes and
then to late endosomes. Late endosomes transport their cargo to lysosomes,
where the cargo material is degraded following fusion and
mixing of contents of endosomes and lysosomes. Early endosomes
derive from endocytic vesicles (clathrin-coated vesicles and caveolae).
Once internalized, endocytic vesicles shed their coat of adaptin and
clathrin, and fuse to form an early endosome, where the receptor
molecules release their bound ligands. Membrane and receptors from
the early endosomes can be recycled to the cell surface as exocytic
vesicles.
Clathrin-dependent endocytosis occurs at specialized patches of
plasma membrane called coated pits; this mechanism is also used to
internalize ligands bound to surface receptor molecules and is also
termed receptor-mediated endocytosis. Caveolae (little caves) are structurally
distinct pinocytotic vesicles most widely used by endothelial and
smooth muscle cells, when they are involved in transcytosis, signal
transduction and possibly other functions. In addition to late endosomes,
lysosomes can also fuse with phagosomes, autophagosomes
and plasma membrane patches for membrane repair. Lysosomal hydrolases
process or degrade exogenous materials (phagocytosis or heterophagy)
as well as endogenous material (autophagy). Phagocytosis
consists of the cellular uptake of invading pathogens, apoptotic cells
and other foreign material by specialized cells. Lysosomes are numerous
in actively phagocytic cells, e.g. macrophages and neutrophil granulocytes,
in which lysosomes are responsible for destroying phagocytosed
particles, e.g. bacteria. In these cells, the phagosome, a vesicle potentially
containing a pathogenic microorganism, may fuse with several
lysosomes.
Autophagy involves the degradation and recycling within an
autophagosome of cytoplasmic components that are no longer needed,
including organelles. The assembly of the autophagosome involves
several proteins, including autophagy-related (Atg) proteins, as well as
Hsc70 chaperone, that translocate the substrate into the lysosome (Boya
et al 2013). Autophagosomes sequester cytoplasmic components and
then fuse with lysosomes without the participation of a late endosome.
The 26S proteasome (see below) is also involved in cellular degradation
but autophagy refers specifically to a lysosomal degradationrecycling
pathway. Autophagosomes are seen in response to starvation and cell
growth.
Late endosomes receive lysosomal enzymes from primary lysosomes
derived from the Golgi apparatus after late endosomelysosome membrane
tethering and fusion followed by diffusion of lysosomal contents
into the endosomal lumen. The pH inside the fused hybrid organelle,
now a secondary lysosome, is low (about 5.0) and this activates lysosomal
acid hydrolases to degrade the endosomal contents. The products
of hydrolysis either are passed through the membrane into the cytosol,
or may be retained in the secondary lysosome. Secondary lysosomes
may grow considerably in size by vesicle fusion to form multivesicular
bodies, and the enzyme concentration may increase greatly to form
large lysosomes (Fig. 1.5B).
Lysosomes
Lysosomes are membrane-bound organelles 80800 nm in diameter,
often with complex inclusions of material undergoing hydrolysis (secondary
lysosomes). Two classes of proteins participate in lysosomal
function: soluble acid hydrolases and integral lysosomal membrane
proteins. Each of the 50 known acid hydrolases (including proteases,
lipases, carbohydrases, esterases and nucleases) degrades a specific substrate.
There are about 25 lysosomal membrane proteins participating
in the acidification of the lysosomal lumen, protein import from the
cytosol, membrane fusion and transport of degradation products to the
cytoplasm. Material that has been hydrolysed within secondary lysosomes
may be completely degraded to soluble products, e.g. amino
acids, which are recycled through metabolic pathways. However, degradation
is usually incomplete and some debris remains. A debris-laden
vesicle is called a residual body or tertiary lysosome (see Fig. 1.5B), and
may be passed to the cell surface, where it is ejected by exocytosis;
alternatively, it may persist inside the cell as an inert residual body.
Considerable numbers of residual bodies can accumulate in long-lived
cells, often fusing to form larger dense vacuoles with complex lamellar
inclusions. As their contents are often darkly pigmented, this may
change the colour of the tissue; e.g. in neurones, the end-product of
lysosomal digestion, lipofuscin (neuromelanin or senility pigment),
gives ageing brains a brownish-yellow colouration. Lysosomal enzymes
salts. Traffic between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus
is bidirectional and takes place via carrier vesicles derived from the
donor site that bud, tether and fuse with the target site.
Golgins are long coiled-coil proteins attached to the cytoplasmic
surface of cisternal membranes, forming a fibrillar matrix surrounding
the Golgi apparatus to stabilize it; they have a role in vesicle trafficking
(for further reading on golgins, see Munro 2011). The Golgi apparatus
has several functions: it links anterograde and retrograde protein and
lipid flow in the secretory pathway; it is the site where protein and lipid
glycosylation occurs; and it provides membrane platforms to which
signalling and sorting proteins bind.
Ultrastructurally, the Golgi apparatus (Fig. 1.5A) displays a continuous
ribbon-like structure consisting of a stack of several flattened
membranous cisternae, together with clusters of vesicles surrounding
its surfaces. Cisternae differ in enzymatic content and activity. Small
transport vesicles from the rough endoplasmic reticulum are received
at one face of the Golgi stack, the convex cis-face (entry or forming
surface). Here, they deliver their contents to the first cisterna in the
series by membrane fusion. From the edges of this cisterna, the protein
is transported to the next cisterna by vesicular budding and then
fusion, and this process is repeated across medial cisternae until the
final cisterna at the concave trans-face (exit or condensing surface) is
reached. Here, larger vesicles are formed for delivery to other parts of
the cell.
The cis-Golgi and trans-Golgi membranous networks form an integral
part of the Golgi apparatus. The cis-Golgi network is a region of
complex membranous channels interposed between the rough endoplasmic
reticulum and the Golgi cis-face, which receives and transmits
vesicles in both directions. Its function is to select appropriate proteins
synthesized on the rough endoplasmic reticulum for delivery by vesicles
to the Golgi stack, while inappropriate proteins are shuttled back to the
rough endoplasmic reticulum.
The trans-Golgi network, at the other side of the Golgi stack, is also
a region of interconnected membrane channels engaged in protein
sorting. Here, modified proteins processed in the Golgi cisternae are
packaged selectively into vesicles and dispatched to different parts of
the cell. The packaging depends on the detection, by the trans-Golgi
network, of particular amino-acid signal sequences, leading to their
enclosure in membranes of appropriate composition that will further
modify their contents, e.g. by extracting water to concentrate them
(vesicles entering the exocytosis pathway) or by pumping in protons to
acidify their contents (lysosomes destined for the intracellular sorting
pathway).
Within the Golgi stack proper, proteins undergo a series of sequential
chemical modifications by Golgi resident enzymes synthesized
in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. These include: glycosylation
(changes in glycosyl groups, e.g. removal of mannose, addition of
N-acetylglucosamine and sialic acid); sulphation (addition of sulphate
groups to glycosaminoglycans); and phosphorylation (addition of
phosphate groups). Some modifications serve as signals to direct proteins
and lipids to their final destination within cells, including lysosomes
and plasma membrane. Lipids formed in the endoplasmic
reticulum are also routed for incorporation into vesicles.
Exocytic (secretory) pathway
Secreted proteins, lipids, glycoproteins, small molecules such as amines
and other cellular products destined for export from the cell are transported
to the plasma membrane in small vesicles released from the
trans-face of the Golgi apparatus. This pathway either is constitutive, in
which transport and secretion occur more or less continuously, as with
immunoglobulins produced by plasma cells, or it is regulated by external
signals, as in the control of salivary secretion by autonomic neural
stimulation. In regulated secretion, the secretory product is stored temporarily
in membrane-bound secretory granules or vesicles. Exocytosis
is achieved by fusion of the secretory vesicular membrane with the
plasma membrane and release of the vesicle contents into the extracellular
domain. In polarized cells, e.g. most epithelia, exocytosis occurs
at the apical plasma membrane. Glandular epithelial cells secrete into
a duct lumen, as in the pancreas, or on to a free surface, such as the
lining of the stomach. In hepatocytes, bile is secreted across a very small
area of plasma membrane forming the wall of the bile canaliculus. This
region is defined as the apical plasma membrane and is the site of
exocrine secretion, whereas secretion of hepatocyte plasma proteins
into the blood stream is targeted to the basolateral surfaces facing the
sinusoids. Packaging of different secretory products into appropriate
vesicles takes place in the trans-Golgi network. Delivery of secretory
vesicles to their correct plasma membrane domains is achieved by
sorting sequences in the cytoplasmic tails of vesicular membrane
proteins.Basic structure and function of cells
8.e1
CHAPTER 1
Carrier vesicles in transit from the endoplasmic reticulum to the
Golgi apparatus (anterograde transport) are coated by coat protein
complex II (COPII), whereas COPI-containing vesicles function in the
retrograde transport route from the Golgi apparatus (reviewed in Spang
(2013)).
The membranes contain specific signal proteins that may allocate
them to microtubule-based transport pathways and allow them to dock
with appropriate targets elsewhere in the cell, e.g. the plasma membrane
in the case of secretory vesicles. Vesicle formation and budding
at the trans-Golgi network involves the addition of clathrin on their
external surface, to form coated pits.
Specialized cells of the immune system, called antigen-presenting
cells, degrade protein molecules, called antigens, transported by the
endocytic pathway for lysosomal breakdown, and expose their fragments
to the cell exterior to elicit an immune response mediated initially
by helper T cells.Cell structure
9
CHAPTER 1
Mitochondria
In the electron microscope, mitochondria usually appear as round or
elliptical bodies 0.52.0 m long (Fig. 1.6), consisting of an outer
mitochondrial membrane; an inner mitochrondrial membrane, separated
from the outer membrane by an intermembrane space; cristae,
infoldings of the inner membrane that harbour ATP synthase to generate
ATP; and the mitochondrial matrix, a space enclosed by the inner
membrane and numerous cristae. The permeability of the two mitochondrial
membranes differs considerably: the outer membrane is
freely permeable to many substances because of the presence of large
non-specific channels formed by proteins (porins), whereas the inner
membrane is permeable to only a narrow range of molecules. The presence
of cardiolipin, a phospholipid, in the inner membrane may contribute
to this relative impermeability.
Mitochondria are the principal source of chemical energy in most
cells. Mitochondria are the site of the citric acid (Krebs) cycle and the
electron transport (cytochrome) pathway by which complex organic
molecules are finally oxidized to carbon dioxide and water. This process
provides the energy to drive the production of ATP from adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (oxidative phosphorylation).
The various enzymes of the citric acid cycle are located in the
mitochondrial matrix, whereas those of the cytochrome system and
oxidative phosphorylation are localized chiefly in the inner mitochondrial
membrane.
The intermembrane space houses cytochrome c, a molecule involved
in activation of apoptosis.
The number of mitochondria in a particular cell reflects its general
energy requirements; e.g. in hepatocytes there may be as many as 2000,
whereas in resting lymphocytes there are usually very few. Mature
may also be secreted  often as part of a process to alter the extracellular
matrix, as in osteoclast-mediated erosion during bone resorption. For
further reading on lysosome biogenesis, see Saftig and Klumperman
(2009).
Lysosomal dysfunction
Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are a consequence of lysosomal
dysfunction. Approximately 60 different types of LSD have been identified
on the basis of the type of material accumulated in cells (such as
mucopolysaccharides, sphingolipids, glycoproteins, glycogen and lipofuscins).
LSDs are characterized by severe neurodegeneration, mental
decline, and cognitive and behavioural abnormalities. Autophagy
impairment caused by defective lysosomeautophagosome coupling
triggers a pathogenic cascade by the accumulation of substrates that
contribute to neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinsons disease,
Alzheimers disease, Huntingtons disease and several tau-opathies.
Many lysosomal storage diseases are known, e.g. TaySachs disease
(GM2 gangliosidosis), in which a faulty -hexosaminidase A leads to
the accumulation of the glycosphingolipid GM2 ganglioside in neurones,
causing death during childhood. In Danon disease, a vacuolar
skeletal myopathy and cardiomyopathy with neurodegeneration in
hemizygous males, lysosomes fail to fuse with autophagosomes because
of a mutation of the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP-2 (lysosomal
associated membrane protein-2).
26S proteasome
A protein can be degraded by different mechanisms, depending on
the cell type and different pathological conditions. Furthermore, the
same substrate can engage different proteolytic pathways (Park and
Cuervo 2013). Three major protein degradation mechanisms operate
in eukaryotic cells to dispose of non-functional cellular proteins:
the autophagosomelysosomal pathway (see above); the apoptotic
procaspasecaspase pathway (see below); and the ubiquitinated
protein26S proteasome pathway. The 26S proteasome is a multicatalytic
protease found in the cytosol and the nucleus that degrades intracellular
proteins conjugated to a polyubiquitin chain by an enzymatic
cascade. The 26S proteasome consists of several subunits arranged into
two 19S polar caps, where protein recognition and adenosine 5-
triphosphate (ATP)-dependent target processing occur, flanking a 20S
central barrel-shaped structure with an inner proteolytic chamber
(Tomko and Hochstrasser 2013). The 26S proteasome participates in
the removal of misfolded or abnormally assembled proteins, the degradation
of cyclins involved in the control of the cell cycle, the processing
and degradation of transcription regulators, cellular-mediated
immune responses, and cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are small (0.21 m in diameter) membrane-bound
organelles present in most mammalian cells. They contain more than
50 enzymes responsible for multiple catabolic and synthetic biochemical
pathways, in particular the -oxidation of very-long-chain fatty
acids (>C22) and the metabolism of hydrogen peroxide (hence the
name peroxisome). Peroxisomes derive from the endoplasmic reticulum
through the transfer of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum
to peroxisomes by vesicles that bud from specialized sites of the endoplasmic
reticulum and by a lipid non-vesicular pathway. All matrix
proteins and some peroxisomal membrane proteins are synthesized by
cytosolic ribosomes and contain a peroxisome targeting signal that
enables them to be imported by proteins called peroxins (Braverman
et al 2013, Theodoulou et al 2013). Mature peroxisomes divide by
small daughter peroxisomes pinching off from a large parental
peroxisome.
Peroxisomes often contain crystalline inclusions composed mainly
of high concentrations of the enzyme urate oxidase. Oxidases use
molecular oxygen to oxidize specific organic substrates (such as L-amino
acids, D-amino acids, urate, xanthine and very-long-chain fatty acids)
and produce hydrogen peroxide that is detoxified (degraded) by peroxisomal
catalase. Peroxisomes are particularly numerous in hepatocytes.
Peroxisomes are important in the oxidative detoxification of
various substances taken into or produced within cells, including
ethanol. Peroxin mutation is a characteristic feature of Zellweger syndrome
(craniofacial dysmorphism and malformations of brain, liver,
eye and kidney; cerebrohepatorenal syndrome). Neonatal leukodystrophy
is an X-linked peroxisomal disease affecting mostly males, caused
by deficiency in -oxidation of very-long-chain fatty acids. The build-up
of very-long-chain fatty acids in the nervous system and suprarenal
glands determines progressive deterioration of brain function and
suprarenal insufficiency (Addisons disease). For further reading, see
Braverman et al (2013).
Fig. 1.6 A, Mitochondria in human cardiac muscle. The folded cristae
(arrows) project into the matrix from the inner mitochondrial membrane.
B, The location of the elementary particles that couple oxidation and
phosphorylation reactions. (A, Courtesy of Dr Bart Wagner,
Histopathology Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK.)
A
B
Elementary
particles
Cristae (folds)
Inner membrane
Outer membraneBasic structure and function of cells
9.e1
CHAPTER 1
The transcription factor EB (TFEB) is responsible for regulating lysosomal
biogenesis and function, lysosome-to-nucleus signalling and
lipid catabolism (for further reading, see Settembre et al (2013)). If any
of the actions of lysosomal hydrolases, of the lysosome acidification
mechanism or of lysosomal membrane proteins fails, the degradation
and recycling of extracellular substrates delivered to lysosomes by the
late endosome and the degradation and recycling of intracellular substrates
by autophagy lead to progressive lysosomal dysfunction in
several tissues and organs.
Experimentally, TFEB activation can reduce the accumulation of
the pathogenic protein in a cellular model of Huntingtons disease (a
neurodegenerative genetic disorder that affects muscle coordination)
and improves the Parkinsons disease phenotype in a murine model.
Cristae are abundant in mitochondria seen in cardiac muscle
cells and in steroid-producing cells (in the suprarenal cortex, corpus
luteum and Leydig cells). The protein steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (StAR) regulates the synthesis of steroids by transporting
cholesterol across the outer mitochondrial membrane. A mutation
in the gene encoding StAR causes defective suprarenal and gonadal
steroidogenesis.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
10
SECTION 1
ent and its electronic charge, and the potential difference across the
membrane. These factors combine to produce an electrochemical gradient,
which governs ion flux. Channel proteins are utilized most effectively
by the excitable plasma membranes of nerve cells, where the
resting membrane potential can change transiently from about 80 mV
(negative inside the cell) to +40 mV (positive inside the cell) when
stimulated by a neurotransmitter (as a result of the opening and subsequent
closure of channels selectively permeable to sodium and
potassium).
Carrier proteins bind their specific solutes, such as amino acids, and
transport them across the membrane through a series of conformational
changes. This latter process is slower than ion transport through
membrane channels. Transport by carrier proteins can occur either passively
by simple diffusion, or actively against the electrochemical gradient
of the solute. Active transport must therefore be coupled to a source
of energy, such as ATP generation, or energy released by the coordinate
movement of an ion down its electrochemical gradient. Linked transport
can be in the same direction as the solute, in which case the carrier
protein is described as a symporter, or in the opposite direction, when
the carrier acts as an antiporter.
Translocation of proteins across
intracellular membranes
Proteins are generally synthesized on ribosomes in the cytosol or on
the rough endoplasmic reticulum. A few are made on mitochondrial
ribosomes. Once synthesized, many proteins remain in the cytosol,
where they carry out their functions. Others, such as integral membrane
proteins or proteins for secretion, are translocated across intracellular
membranes for post-translational modification and targeting to their
destinations. This is achieved by the signal sequence, an addressing
system contained within the protein sequence of amino acids, which is
recognized by receptors or translocators in the appropriate membrane.
Proteins are thus sorted by their signal sequence (or set of sequences
that become spatially grouped as a signal patch when the protein folds
into its tertiary configuration), so that they are recognized by and enter
the correct intracellular membrane compartment.
Cell signalling
Cellular systems in the body communicate with each other to coordinate
and integrate their functions. This occurs through a variety of
processes known collectively as cell signalling, in which a signalling
molecule produced by one cell is detected by another, almost always by
means of a specific receptor protein molecule. The recipient cell transduces
the signal, which it most often detects at the plasma membrane,
into intracellular chemical messages that change cell behaviour.
The signal may act over a long distance, e.g. endocrine signalling
through the release of hormones into the blood stream, or neuronal
synaptic signalling via electrical impulse transmission along axons
and subsequent release of chemical transmitters of the signal at synapses
or neuromuscular junctions. A specialized variation of endocrine
signalling (neurocrine or neuroendocrine signalling) occurs when neurones
or paraneurones (e.g. chromaffin cells of the suprarenal medulla)
secrete a hormone into interstitial fluid and the blood stream.
Alternatively, signalling may occur at short range through a paracrine
mechanism, in which cells of one type release molecules into the interstitial
fluid of the local environment, to be detected by nearby cells of
a different type that express the specific receptor protein. Neurocrine
cell signalling uses chemical messengers found also in the central
nervous system, which may act in a paracrine manner via interstitial
fluid or reach more distant target tissues via the blood stream. Cells
may generate and respond to the same signal. This is autocrine signalling,
a phenomenon that reinforces the coordinated activities of a group
of like cells, which respond together to a high concentration of a local
signalling molecule. The most extreme form of short-distance signalling
is contact-dependent (juxtacrine) signalling, where one cell responds to
transmembrane proteins of an adjacent cell that bind to surface receptors
in the responding cell membrane. Contact-dependent signalling
also includes cellular responses to integrins on the cell surface binding
to elements of the extracellular matrix. Juxtacrine signalling is important
during development and in immune responses. These different
types of intercellular signalling mechanism are illustrated in Figure 1.7.
For further reading on cell signalling pathways, see Kierszenbaum and
Tres (2012).
Signalling molecules and their receptors
The majority of signalling molecules (ligands) are hydrophilic and so
cannot cross the plasma membrane of a recipient cell to effect changes
erythrocytes lack mitochondria altogether. Cells with few mitochondria
generally rely largely on glycolysis for their energy supplies. These
include some very active cells, e.g. fast twitch skeletal muscle fibres,
which are able to work rapidly but for only a limited duration. Mitochondria
appear in the light microscope as long, thin structures in the
cytoplasm of most cells, particularly those with a high metabolic rate,
e.g. secretory cells in exocrine glands. In living cells, mitochondria
constantly change shape and intracellular position; they multiply by
growth and fission, and may undergo fusion.
The mitochondrial matrix is an aqueous environment. It contains a
variety of enzymes, and strands of mitochondrial DNA with the capacity
for transcription and translation of a unique set of mitochondrial genes
(mitochondrial mRNAs and transfer RNAs, mitochondrial ribosomes
with rRNAs). The DNA forms a closed loop, about 5 m across; several
identical copies are present in each mitochondrion. The ratio between
its bases differs from that of nuclear DNA, and the RNA sequences also
differ in the precise genetic code used in protein synthesis. At least 13
respiratory chain enzymes of the matrix and inner membrane are
encoded by the small number of genes along the mitochondrial DNA.
The great majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nuclear
genes and made in the cytosol, then inserted through special channels
in the mitochondrial membranes to reach their destinations. Their
membrane lipids are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum.
It has been shown that mitochondria are of maternal origin because
the mitochondria of spermatozoa are not generally incorporated
into the ovum at fertilization. Thus mitochondria (and mitochondrial
genetic variations and mutations) are passed only through the
female line.
Mitochondria are distributed within a cell according to regional
energy requirements, e.g. near the bases of cilia in ciliated epithelia, in
the basal domain of the cells of proximal convoluted tubules in the
renal cortex (where considerable active transport occurs) and around
the proximal segment, called middle piece, of the flagellum in spermatozoa.
They may be involved with tissue-specific metabolic reactions,
e.g. various urea-forming enzymes are found in liver cell mitochondria.
Moreover, a number of genetic diseases of mitochondria affect particular
tissues exclusively, e.g. mitochondrial myopathies (skeletal muscle)
and mitochondrial neuropathies (nervous tissue). For further information
on mitochondrial genetics and disorders, see Chinnery and Hudson
(2013).
Cytosolic inclusions
The aqueous cytosol surrounds the membranous organelles described
above. It also contains various non-membranous inclusions, including
free ribosomes, components of the cytoskeleton, and other inclusions,
such as storage granules (e.g. glycogen), pigments (such as lipofuscin
granules, remnants of the lipid oxidative mechanism seen in the suprarenal
cortex) and lipid droplets.
Lipid droplets
Lipid droplets are spherical bodies of various sizes found within many
cells, but are especially prominent in the adipocytes (fat cells) of
adipose connective tissue. They do not belong to the Golgi-related vacuolar
system of the cell. They are not membrane-bound, but are droplets
of lipid suspended in the cytosol and surrounded by perilipin proteins,
which regulate lipid storage and lipolysis. See Smith and Ordovs
(2012) for further reading on obesity and perilipins. In cells specialized
for lipid storage, the vacuoles reach 80 m or more in diameter. They
function as stores of chemical energy, thermal insulators and mechanical
shock absorbers in adipocytes. In many cells, they may represent
end-products of other metabolic pathways, e.g. in steroid-synthesizing
cells, where they are a prominent feature of the cytoplasm. They may
also be secreted, as in the alveolar epithelium of the lactating breast.
Transport across cell membranes
Lipid bilayers are increasingly impermeable to molecules as they
increase in size or hydrophobicity. Transport mechanisms are therefore
required to carry essential polar molecules, including ions, nutrients,
nucleotides and metabolites of various kinds, across the plasma membrane
and into or out of membrane-bound intracellular compartments.
Transport is facilitated by a variety of membrane transport proteins,
each with specificity for a particular class of molecule, e.g. sugars. Transport
proteins fall mainly into two major classes: channel proteins and
carrier proteins.
Channel proteins form aqueous pores in the membrane, which open
and close under the regulation of intracellular signals, e.g. G-proteins,
to allow the flux of solutes (usually inorganic ions) of specific size and
charge. Transport through ion channels is always passive, and ion flow
through an open channel depends only on the ion concentration gradiBasic structure and function of cells
10.e1
CHAPTER 1
Mitochondrial ribosomes are smaller and quite distinct from those
of the rest of the cell in that they (and mitochondrial nucleic acids)
resemble those of bacteria. This similarity underpins the theory that
mitochondrial ancestors were oxygen-utilizing bacteria that existed in
a symbiotic relationship with eukaryotic cells unable to metabolize the
oxygen produced by early plants. As mitochondria are formed only
from previously existing ones, it follows that all mitochondria in the
body are descended from those in the cytoplasm of the fertilized ovum.Cell structure
11
CHAPTER 1
among signalling molecules in having no specific receptor protein; it
acts directly on intracellular enzymes of the response pathway.
Receptor proteins
There are some 20 different families of receptor proteins, each with
several isoforms responding to different ligands. The great majority of
these receptors are transmembrane proteins. Members of each family
share structural features that indicate either shared ligand-binding characteristics
in the extracellular domain or shared signal transduction
properties in the cytoplasmic domain, or both. There is little relationship
either between the nature of a ligand and the family of receptor
proteins to which it binds and activates, or the signal transduction
strategies by which an intracellular response is achieved. The same
ligand may activate fundamentally different types of receptor in different
cell types.
Cell surface receptor proteins are generally grouped according to
their linkage to one of three intracellular systems: ion channel-linked
receptors; G-protein coupled receptors; and receptors that link to
enzyme systems. Other receptors do not fit neatly into any of these
categories. All the known G-protein coupled receptors belong to a
structural group of proteins that pass through the membrane seven
times in a series of serpentine loops. These receptors are thus known as
seven-pass transmembrane receptors or, because the transmembrane
regions are formed from -helical domains, as seven-helix receptors.
The best known of this large group of phylogenetically ancient receptors
are the odorant-binding proteins of the olfactory system; the lightsensitive
receptor protein, rhodopsin; and many of the receptors for
clinically useful drugs. A comprehensive list of receptor proteins, their
activating ligands and examples of the resultant biological function is
given in Pollard and Earnshaw (2008).
Intracellular signalling
A wide variety of small molecules carry signals within cells, conveying
the signal from its source (e.g. activated plasma membrane receptor) to
its target (e.g. the nucleus). These second messengers convey signals as
fluctuations in local concentration, according to rates of synthesis and
degradation by specific enzymes (e.g. cyclases involved in cyclic nucleotide
(cAMP, cGMP) synthesis), or, in the case of calcium, according to
the activities of calcium channels and pumps. Other, lipidic, second
inside the cell unless they first bind to a plasma membrane receptor
protein. Ligands are mainly proteins (usually glycoproteins), polypeptides
or highly charged biogenic amines. They include: classic peptide
hormones of the endocrine system; cytokines, which are mainly of
haemopoietic cell origin and involved in inflammatory responses and
tissue remodelling (e.g. the interferons, interleukins, tumour necrosis
factor, leukaemia inhibitory factor); and polypeptide growth factors
(e.g. the epidermal growth factor superfamily, nerve growth factor,
platelet-derived growth factor, the fibroblast growth factor family, transforming
growth factor beta and the insulin-like growth factors).
Polypeptide growth factors are multifunctional molecules with more
widespread actions and cellular sources than their names suggest. They
and their receptors are commonly mutated or aberrantly expressed in
certain cancers. The cancer-causing gene variant is termed a transforming
oncogene and the normal (wild-type) version of the gene is a cellular
oncogene or proto-oncogene. The activated receptor acts as a
transducer to generate intracellular signals, which are either small diffusible
second messengers (e.g. calcium, cyclic adenosine monophosphate
or the plasma membrane lipid-soluble diacylglycerol), or larger
protein complexes that amplify and relay the signal to target control
systems.
Some signals are hydrophobic and able to cross the plasma membrane
freely. Classic examples are the steroid hormones, thyroid hormones,
retinoids and vitamin D. Steroids, for instance, enter cells
non-selectively, but elicit a specific response only in those target cells
that express specific cytoplasmic or nuclear receptors. Light stimuli also
cross the plasma membranes of photoreceptor cells and interact intracellularly,
at least in rod cells, with membrane-bound photosensitive
receptor proteins. Hydrophobic ligands are transported in the blood
stream or interstitial fluids, generally bound to carrier proteins, and they
often have a longer half-life and longer-lasting effects on their targets
than do water-soluble ligands.
A separate group of signalling molecules able to cross the plasma
membrane freely is typified by the gas, nitric oxide. The principal target
of short-range nitric oxide signalling is smooth muscle, which relaxes
in response. Nitric oxide is released from vascular endothelium as a
result of the action of autonomic nerves that supply the vessel wall
causing local relaxation of smooth muscle and dilation of vessels. This
mechanism is responsible for penile erection. Nitric oxide is unusual
Fig. 1.7 The different modes of cellcell signalling.
A Endocrine B Paracrine
C Autocrine D Synaptic
E Neurocrine F Contact-dependent
Endocrine cell A
Different
hormones
Target cell B
Receptor Y
Target cell A
Blood stream
Endocrine cell B
Receptor X
Target
cells
Signalling
cell
Membrane receptor
Hormone or
growth factor
Target cell
Synapse
Cell body Neurotransmitter
Axon
Neurone
Distant target cell
Neuroendocrine
Stimulus cell
Blood vessel
Membrane-bound
signal molecule
Signalling cell Target cell
Short-range signalling
molecule
Neuropeptide
or amineBasic str uct ure and function of ce lls
12
SECTION 1
are microfilaments (7 nm thick), microtubules (25 nm thick) and intermediate
filaments (10 nm thick). Other important components are
proteins that bind to the principal filamentous types to assemble or
disassemble them, regulate their stability or generate movement. These
include actin-binding proteins such as myosin, which in some cells can
assemble into thick filaments, and microtubule-associated proteins.
Pathologies involving cytoskeletal abnormalities include ciliopathies
(resulting from the abnormal assembly and function of centrioles, basal
bodies and cilia); neurodegenerative diseases (a consequence of defective
anterograde transport of neurotransmitters along microtubules in
axons); and sterility (determined by defective or absent microtubuleassociated
dynein in axonemes, e.g. Kartageners syndrome).
Actin filaments (microfilaments)
Actin filaments are flexible filaments, 7 nm thick (Fig. 1.8). Within
most cell types, actin constitutes the most abundant protein and in
some motile cells its concentration may exceed 200 M (10 mg protein
per ml cytoplasm). The filaments are formed by the ATP-dependent
polymerization of actin monomer (with a molecular mass of 43 kDa)
into a characteristic string of beads in which the subunits are arranged
in a linear tight helix with a distance of 13 subunits between turns
(Dominguez 2010). The polymerized filamentous form is termed
F-actin (fibrillar actin) and the unpolymerized monomeric form is
known as G-actin (globular actin). Each monomer has an asymmetric
structure. When monomers polymerize, they confer a defined polarity
on the filament: the plus or barbed end favours monomer addition,
and the minus or pointed end favours monomer dissociation.
Treadmilling designates the simultaneous polymerization of an
actin filament at one end and depolymerization at the other end to
maintain its constant length.
See Bray (2001) for further reading.
Actin-binding proteins
A wide variety of actin-binding proteins are capable of modulating the
form of actin within the cell. These interactions are fundamental to the
messengers such as phosphatidylinositol, derive from membranes and
may act within the membrane to generate downstream effects. For
further consideration of the complexity of intracellular signalling pathways,
see Pollard and Earnshaw (2008).
Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a three-dimensional network of filamentous intracellular
proteins of different shapes, sizes and composition distributed
throughout the cytoplasm. It provides mechanical support, maintains
cell shape and rigidity, and enables cells to adopt highly asymmetric or
irregular profiles. It plays an important part in establishing structural
polarity and different functional domains within a cell. It also provides
mechanical support for permanent projections from the cell surface (see
below), including persistent microvilli and cilia, and transient processes,
such as the thin finger-like protrusions called filopodia (0.1
0.3 m) and lamellipodia (0.10.2 m). Filopodia consist of parallel
bundles of actin filaments and have a role in cell migration, wound
healing and neurite growth. The protrusive thin and broad lamellipodia,
found at the leading edge of a motile cell, contain a branched
network of actin filaments.
The cytoskeleton restricts specific structures to particular cellular
locations. For example, the Golgi apparatus is near the nucleus and
endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria are near sites of energy
requirement. In addition, the cytoskeleton provides tracks for intracellular
transport (e.g. shuttling vesicles and macromolecules, called
cargoes, among cytoplasmic sites), the movement of chromosomes
during cell division (mitosis and meiosis) or movement of the entire
cell during embryonic morphogenesis or the chemotactic extravascular
migration of leukocytes during homing. Examples of highly developed
and specialized functions of the cytoskeleton include the contraction
of the sarcomere in striated muscle cells and the bending of the axoneme
of cilia and flagella.
The catalogue of cytoskeletal structural proteins is extensive and still
increasing. The major filamentous structures found in non-muscle cells
Fig. 1.8 Structural and molecular
features of cytoskeletal components.
A, The actin filament (F-actin) is a
7 nm thick polymer chain of
ATP-bound G-actin monomers.
F-actin consists of a barbed (plus)
end, the initiation site of F-actin,
and a pointed (minus) end, the
dissociation site of F-actin. F-actin
can be severed and capped at the
barbed end by gelsolin. B, The
microtubule is a 25 nm diameter
polymer of GTP-bound -tubulin and
GTP-bound -tubulin dimers. The
dimer assembles at the plus end and
depolymerizes at the minus end. A
linear chain of -tubulin/-tubulin
dimers is called a protofilament. In
the end-on (top view), a microtubule
displays 13 concentrically arranged
tubulin subunits. C, Tetrameric
complexes of intermediate filament
subunits associate laterally to form a
unit length filament consisting of
eight tetramers. Additional unit length
filaments anneal longitudinally and
generate a mature 10 nm thick
intermediate filament.
Tetramer
Unit length filament
Intermediate filament
A Actin filament B Microtubule C Intermediate filament
10 nm thick
7 nm thick 25 nm in diameter
Top view:
13 concentric tubulins
Protofilament
Severed actin filament Minus end
Capped barbed end
Gelsolin
Pointed end
Plus end
Barbed end
Monomer Tubulin dimer
GTP
GTP
GTP
Gactin
ATP tubulin
tubulinBasic structure and function of cells
12.e1
CHAPTER 1
Septins are emerging as a novel cytoskeletal member because of their
filamentous organization and association with actin filaments and
microtubules. They are guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins
that form hetero-oligomeric complexes (see Mostowy and Cossart
(2012) for additional information).
This polarity can be visualized in negatively stained images by allowing
F-actin to react with fragments containing the active head region of
myosin. Myosins bind to filamentous actin at an angle to give the
appearance of a series of arrowheads pointing towards the minus end
of the filament, with the barbs pointing towards the plus end.
It involves the addition of ATP-bound G-actin monomers at the
barbed end (fast-growing plus end) and removal of ADP-bound G-actin
at the pointed end (slow-growing minus end). Actin filaments grow or
shrink by addition or loss of G-actin monomer at both ends. Essentially,
actin polymerization in vitro proceeds in three steps: nucleation (aggregation
of G-actin monomers into a 34-monomer aggregate), elongation
(addition of G-actin monomers to the aggregate) and a dynamic
steady state (treadmilling). Specific toxins (e.g. cytochalasins, phalloidins
and lantrunculins) bind to actin and affect its polymerization.
Cytochalasin D blocks the addition of new G-actin monomers to the
barbed end of F-actin; phalloidin binds to the interface between G-actin
monomers in F-actin, thus preventing depolymerization; and lantrunculin
binds to G-actin monomers, blocking their addition to an actin
filament.Cell structure
13
CHAPTER 1
organization of cytoplasm and to cell shape. The actin cytoskeleton is
organized as closely packed parallel arrays of actin filaments forming
bundles or cables, or loosely packed criss-crossed actin filaments
forming networks (Fig. 1.9A). Actin-binding proteins hold together
bundles and networks of actin filaments. Actin-binding proteins can
be grouped into G-actin (monomer) binding proteins and F-actin
(polymer) capping, cross-linking and severing proteins. Actin-binding
proteins may have more than one function.
Capping proteins bind to the ends of the actin filament either
to stabilize an actin filament or to promote its disassembly (see
Fig. 1.8).
Cross-linking or bundling proteins tie actin filaments together in
longitudinal arrays to form bundles, cables or core structures. The
bundles may be closely packed in microvilli and filopodia, where parallel
filaments are tied tightly together to form stiff bundles orientated in
the same direction. Cross-linking proteins of the microvillus actin
bundle core include fimbrin and villin.
Other actin-bundling proteins form rather looser bundles of filaments
that run antiparallel to each other with respect to their plus and
minus ends. They include myosin II, which can form cross-links with
ATP-dependent motor activity, and cause adjacent actin filaments to
slide on each other in the striated muscle sarcomere, and either change
the shape of cells or (if the actin bundles are anchored into the cell
Fig. 1.9 The
cytoskeleton. A, An
immunofluorescence
micrograph of -actin
microfilaments (green) in
human airway smooth
muscle cells in culture.
The actin-binding
protein, vinculin (red), is
localized at the ends of
actin filament bundles;
nuclei are blue. B, An
immunofluorescence
micrograph of keratin
intermediate filaments
(green) in human
keratinocytes in culture.
Desmosome junctions
are labelled with
antibody against
desmoplakin (red).
Nuclei are stained blue
(Hoechst). C, An
electron micrograph of
human nerve showing
microtubules (small,
hollow structures in
cross-section, long
arrow) in a transverse
section of an
unmyelinated axon (A),
engulfed by a Schwann
cell (S). Neuronal
intermediate filaments
(neurofilaments) are the
solid, electron-dense
profiles, also in
transverse section (short
arrow). (A, Courtesy of
Dr T Nguyen, Professor
J Ward, Dr SJ Hirst,
Kings College London.
B, Courtesy of Prof.
Dr WW Franke, German
Cancer Research
Centre, Heidelberg.
C, Courtesy of Dr Bart
Wagner, Histopathology
Department, Sheffield
Teaching Hospitals, UK.)
A
B
C
S
A
membrane at both ends), maintain a degree of active rigidity. Filamin
interconnects adjacent actin filaments to produce loose filamentous
gel-like networks composed of randomly orientated F-actin.
F-actin can branch. The assembly of branched filamentous actin
networks involves a complex of seven actin-related proteins 2/3
(Arp2/3) that is structurally similar to the barbed end of actin.
See Rotty et al (2013) for further reading.
Branched actin generated by the Arp2/3 protein complex localizes
at the leading edge of migrating cells, lamellipodia and phagosomes
(required for the capture by endocytosis and phagocytosis of particles
and foreign pathogens by immune cells). Formin can elongate preexisting
actin filaments by removing capping proteins at the barbed
end.
Other classes of actin-binding protein link the actin cytoskeleton to
the plasma membrane either directly or indirectly through a variety of
membrane-associated proteins. The latter may also create links via
transmembrane proteins to the extracellular matrix. Best known of
these is the family of spectrin-like molecules, which can bind to actin
and also to each other and to various membrane-associated proteins to
create supportive networks beneath the plasma membrane. Tetrameres
of spectrin  and  chains line the intracellular side of the plasma
membrane of erythrocytes and maintain their integrity by their association
with short actin filaments at either end of the tetramer.
Class V myosins are unconventional motor proteins transporting
cargoes (such as vesicles and organelles) along actin filaments.
Class I myosins are involved in membrane dynamics and actin organization
at the cell cortex, thus affecting cell migration, endocytosis,
pinocytosis and phagocytosis. Tropomyosin, an important regulatory
protein of muscle fibres, is also present in non-muscle cells, where
its function may be primarily to stabilize actin filaments against
depolymerization.
Myosins, the motor proteins
The myosin family of microfilaments is often classified within a distinct
category of motor proteins. Myosin proteins have a globular head
region consisting of a heavy and a light chain. The heavy chain bears
an -helical tail of varying length. The head has an ATPase activity and
can bind to and move along actin filaments  the basis for myosin
function as a motor protein. The best-known class is myosin II, which
occurs in muscle and in many non-muscle cells. Its molecules have two
heads and two tails, intertwined to form a long rod. The rods can bind
to each other to form long, thick filaments, as seen in striated and
smooth muscle fibres and myoepithelial cells. Myosin II molecules can
also assemble into smaller groups, especially dimers, which can crosslink
individual actin microfilaments in stress fibres and other F-actin
arrays. The ATP-dependent sliding of myosin on actin forms the basis
for muscle contraction and the extension of microfilament bundles, as
seen in cellular motility or in the contraction of the ring of actin and
myosin around the cleavage furrow of dividing cells. There are a number
of known subtypes of myosin II; they assemble in different ways and
have different dynamic properties. In skeletal muscle the myosin molecules
form bipolar filaments 15 nm thick. Because these filaments have
a symmetric antiparallel arrangement of subunits, the midpoint is bare
of head regions. In smooth muscle the molecules form thicker, flattened
bundles and are orientated in random directions on either face of the
bundle. These arrangements have important consequences for the contractile
force characteristics of the different types of muscle cell.
Related molecules include the myosin I subfamily of single-headed
molecules with tails of varying length. Functions of myosin I include
the movements of membranes in endocytosis, filopodial formation in
neuronal growth cones, actinactin sliding and attachment of actin to
membranes as seen in microvilli. As indicated above, molecular motors
of the myosin V family are implicated in the movements of cargoes on
actin filaments. So, for example, myosin Va transports vesicles along
F-actin tracks in a similar manner to kinesin and cytoplasmic dyneinrelated
cargo transport along microtubules. Each class of motor protein
has different properties, but during cargo trafficking they often function
together in a coordinated fashion. (See Hammer 3rd and Sellers (2012)
for further reading on class V myosins.)
Other thin filaments
A heterogeneous group of filamentous structures with diameters of
24 nm occurs in various cells. The two most widely studied forms, titin
and nebulin, constitute around 13% of the total protein of skeletal
muscle. They are amongst the largest known molecules and have
subunit weights of around 106; native molecules are about 1 m in
length. Their repetitive bead-like structure gives them elastic properties
that are important for the effective functioning of muscle, and possibly
for other cells.Basic structure and function of cells
13.e1
CHAPTER 1
Profilin and thymosin 4 are G-actin binding proteins. Profilin binds
to G-actin bound to ATP; it inhibits addition of G-actin to the slowgrowing
(pointed) end of F-actin but enables the fast-growing (barbed)
end to grow faster and then dissociates from the actin filament. In addition,
profilin participates in the conversion of ADP back to the ATPGactin
bound form. Thymosin 4 binds to the ATPG-actin bound form,
preventing polymerization by sequestering ATPG-actin into a reserve
pool.
Members of the F-actin capping protein family are heterodimers
consisting of an  subunit (CP) and a  subunit (CP) that cap the
barbed end of actin filaments within all eukaryotic cells. Gelsolin has
a dual role: it severs F-actin and caps the newly formed barbed end,
blocking further filament elongation.
Fascin is an additional cross-linking protein. Villin is also a severing
protein, causing the disassembly of actin filaments and the collapse of
the microvillus.
In the presence of activated nucleation promotion factors, such as
WiskottAldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and WASP family verprolinhomologous
protein (WAVE, also known as SCAR), the Arp2/3 protein
complex binds to the side of an existing actin filament (mother filament)
and initiates the formation of a branching actin daughter filament
at a 70 angle relative to the mother filament utilizing G-actin
delivered to the Arp2/3 complex site.
Spectrin-related molecules are present in many other cells. For
instance, fodrin is found in neurones and dystrophin occurs in muscle
cells, linking the contractile apparatus with the extracellular matrix via
integral membrane proteins. Proteins such as ankyrin (which also binds
actin directly), vinculin, talin, zyxin and paxillin connect actin-binding
proteins to integral plasma membrane proteins such as integrins
(directly or indirectly), and thence to focal adhesions (consisting of a
bundle of actin filaments attached to a portion of a plasma membrane
linked to the extracellular matrix).Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
14
SECTION 1
microtubules for considerable distances, thus enabling selective targeting
of materials within the cell. Such movements occur in both directions
along microtubules. Kinesin-dependent motion is usually towards
the plus ends of microtubules, e.g. from the cell body towards the axon
terminals in neurones, and away from the centrosome in other cells.
Conversely, dynein-related movements are in the opposite direction, i.e.
to the minus ends of microtubules. Dyneins also form the arms of
peripheral microtubules in cilia and flagella, where they make dynamic
cross-bridges to adjacent microtubule pairs. When these tethered
dyneins try to move, the resulting shearing forces cause the axonemal
array of microtubules to bend, generating ciliary and flagellar beating
movements. Kinesins form a large and diverse family of related
microtubule-stimulated ATPases. Some kinesins are motors that move
cargo and others cause microtubule disassembly, whilst still others
cross-link mitotic spindle microtubules to push the two centriolar poles
apart during mitotic prophase. See Bray (2001) for further reading.
Centrioles, centrosomes and basal bodies
Centrioles are microtubular cylinders 0.2 m in diameter and 0.4 m
long (Fig. 1.10). They are formed by a ring of nine microtubule triplets
linked by a number of other proteins. At least two centrioles occur in
all animal cells that are capable of mitotic division (eggs, which undergo
meiosis instead of mitosis, lack centrioles). See Gnczy (2012) for
further reading on the structure and assembly of the centriole. They
usually lie close together, at right angles or, most usually, at an oblique
angle to each other (an arrangement often termed a diplosome), within
the centrosome, a densely filamentous region of cytoplasm at the centre
of the cell. The centrosome is the major microtubule-organizing centre
of most cells; it is the site at which new microtubules are formed and
the mitotic spindle is generated during cell division. Centriole biogenesis
is a complex process. At the beginning of the S phase (DNA replication
phase) of the cell cycle (see below), a new daughter centriole forms
at right angles to each separated maternal centriole. Each mother
daughter pair forms one pole of the next mitotic spindle, and the
daughter centriole becomes fully mature only as the progeny cells are
about to enter the next mitosis. Because centrosomes are microtubuleorganizing
centres, they lie at the centre of a network of microtubules,
all of which have their minus ends proximal to the centrosome.
The microtubule-organizing centre contains complexes of -tubulin
that nucleate microtubule polymerization at the minus ends of microtubules.
Basal bodies are microtubule-organizing centres that are closely
related to centrioles, and are believed to be derived from them. They
are located at the bases of cilia and flagella, which they anchor to the
cell surface. The outer microtubule doublets of the axoneme of cilia and
flagella originate from two of the microtubules in each triplet of the
basal body.
Microtubule-based transport of cargoes
The transport of cargoes along microtubules via the motor proteins
kinesin and cytoplasmic dynein respectively is the means by which
neurotransmitters are delivered along axons to neuronal synapses
Microtubules
Microtubules are polymers of tubulin with the form of hollow, relatively
rigid cylinders, approximately 25 nm in diameter and of varying
length (up to 70 m in spermatozoan flagella). They are present in most
cell types, being particularly abundant in neurones, leukocytes and
blood platelets. Microtubules are the predominant constituents of the
mitotic spindles of dividing cells and also form part of the axoneme of
cilia, flagella and centrioles.
Microtubules consist of tubulin dimers and microtubule-associated
proteins. There are two major classes of tubulin: - and -tubulins.
Before microtubule assembly, tubulins are associated as dimers with a
combined molecular mass of 100 kDa (50 kDa each). Each protein
subunit is approximately 5 nm across and is arranged along the long
axis in straight rows of alternating - and -tubulins, forming protofilaments
(see Fig. 1.8). Typically, 13 protofilaments (the number can vary
between 11 and 16) associate in a ring to form the wall of a hollow
cylindrical microtubule. Each longitudinal row is slightly out of alignment
with its neighbour, so that a spiral pattern of alternating  and 
subunits appears when the microtubule is viewed from the side. There
is a dynamic equilibrium between the dimers and assembled microtubules:
dimeric asymmetry creates polarity (-tubulins are all orientated
towards the minus end, -tubulins towards the plus end). Tubulin is
added preferentially to the plus end; the minus end is relatively slowgrowing.
Microtubules frequently grow and shrink at a rapid and constant
rate, a phenomenon known as dynamic instability, in which
growing tubules can undergo a catastrophe, abruptly shifting from net
growth to rapid shrinkage. The primary determinant of whether microtubules
grow or shrink is the rate of GTP hydrolysis. Tubulins are GTPbinding
proteins; microtubule growth is accompanied by hydrolysis of
GTP, which may regulate the dynamic behaviour of the tubules. Microtubule
growth is initiated at specific sites, the microtubule-organizing
centres, of which the best known are centrosomes (from which most
cellular microtubules polymerize) and the centriole-derived basal
bodies (from which cilia grow). Microtubule-organizing centres include
a specialized tubulin isoform known as -tubulin that is essential for
the nucleation of microtubule growth.
Various drugs (e.g. colcemid, vinblastine, griseofulvin, nocodazole)
cause microtubule depolymerization by binding the soluble tubulin
dimers and so shifting the equilibrium towards the unpolymerized
state. Microtubule disassembly causes a wide variety of effects, including
the inhibition of cell division by disruption of the mitotic spindle.
Conversely, the drug paclitaxel (taxol) is a microtubule depolymerization
inhibitor because it stabilizes microtubules and promotes abnormal
microtubule assembly. Although this can cause a peripheral
neuropathy, paclitaxel is widely used as an effective chemotherapeutic
agent in the treatment of breast and ovarian cancer.
Microtubule-associated proteins
Various proteins that can bind to assembled tubulins may be concerned
with structural properties or associated with motility. One important
class of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) consists of proteins
that associate with the plus ends of microtubules. They regulate the
dynamic instability of microtubules as well as interactions with other
cellular substructures. Structural MAPs form cross-bridges between adjacent
microtubules or between microtubules and other structures such
as intermediate filaments, mitochondria and the plasma membrane.
Microtubule-associated proteins found in neurones include: MAPs 1A
and 1B, which are present in neuronal dendrites and axons; MAPs 2A
and 2B, found chiefly in dendrites; and tau, found only in axons. MAP
4 is the major microtubule-associated protein in many other cell types.
Structural microtubule-associated proteins are implicated in microtubule
formation, maintenance and disassembly, and are therefore of
considerable significance in cell morphogenesis, mitotic division, and
the maintenance and modulation of cell shape. Transport-associated
microtubule-associated proteins are found in situations in which movement
occurs over the surfaces of microtubules, e.g. cargo transport,
bending of cilia and flagella, and some movements of mitotic spindles.
They include a large family of motor proteins, the best known of which
are the dyneins and kinesins. Another protein, dynamin, is involved in
endocytosis. The kinetochore proteins assemble at the chromosomal
centromere during mitosis and meiosis. They attach (and thus fasten
chromosomes) to spindle microtubules; some of the kinetochore proteins
are responsible for chromosomal movements in mitotic and
meiotic anaphase.
All of these microtubule-associated proteins bind to microtubules
and either actively slide along their surfaces or promote microtubule
assembly or disassembly. Kinesins and dyneins can simultaneously
attach to membranes such as transport vesicles and convey them along
Fig. 1.10 A duplicated
pair of centrioles in a
human carcinoma
specimen. Each
centriole pair consists
of a mother and
daughter, orientated
approximately at right
angles to each other so
that one is sectioned
transversely (T) and the
other longitudinally (L).
The transversely
sectioned centrioles
are seen as rings of
microtubule triplets
(arrow). (Courtesy of
Dr Bart Wagner,
Histopathology
Department, Sheffield
Teaching Hospitals,
UK.)
T
LBasic structure and function of cells
14.e1
CHAPTER 1
The association of membrane vesicles with dynein motors means
that certain cytomembranes (including the Golgi apparatus) concentrate
near the centrosome. This is convenient because the microtubules
provide a means of targeting Golgi vesicular products to different parts
of the cell.Cell structure
15
CHAPTER 1
sion. Of the different classes of intermediate filaments, keratin (cytokeratin)
proteins are found in epithelia, where keratin filaments are
always composed of equal ratios of type I (acidic) and type II (basic to
neutral) keratins to form heteropolymers. About 20 types of each of the
acidic and basic/neutral keratin proteins are known. For further reading
on keratins in normal and diseased epithelia, see Pan et al (2012).
Within the epidermis, expression of keratin heteropolymers changes as
keratinocytes mature during their transition from basal to superficial
layers. Genetic abnormalities of keratins are known to affect the
mechanical stability of epithelia. For example, the disease epidermolysis
bullosa simplex is caused by lysis of epidermal basal cells and blistering
of the skin after mechanical trauma. Defects in genes encoding keratins
5 and 14 produce cytoskeletal instability leading to cellular fragility in
the basal cells of the epidermis. When keratins 1 and 10 are affected,
cells in the spinous (prickle) cell layer of the epidermis lyse, and this
produces the intraepidermal blistering of epidermolytic hyperkeratosis.
See Porter and Lane (2003) for further reading.
Type III intermediate filament proteins, including vimentin, desmin,
glial fibrillary acidic protein and peripherin, form homopolymer intermediate
filaments. Vimentin is expressed in mesenchyme-derived cells
of connective tissue and some ectodermal cells during early development;
desmins in muscle cells; glial fibrillary acidic protein in glial
cells; and peripherin in peripheral axons. Type IV intermediate filaments
include neurofilaments, nestin, syncoilin and -internexin. Neurofilaments
are a major cytoskeletal element in neurones, particularly
in axons (see Fig. 1.9C), where they are the dominant protein. Neurofilaments
(NF) are heteropolymers of low (NFL), medium (NFM)
and high (NFH) molecular weight (the NFL form is always present
in combination with either NFM or NFH forms). Abnormal accumulations
of neurofilaments (neurofibrillary tangles) are characteristic
features of a number of neuropathological conditions. Nestin resembles
a neurofilament protein, which forms intermediate filaments in
neurectodermal stem cells in particular. The type V intermediate filament
group includes the nuclear lamins A, lamin B1 and lamin B2
lining the inner surface of the nuclear envelope of all nucleated cells.
Lamin C is a splice variant of lamin A. Lamins provide a mechanical
framework for the nucleus and act as attachment sites for a number of
proteins that organize chromatin at the periphery of the nucleus. They
are unusual in that they form an irregular anastomosing network of
filaments rather than linear bundles. See Burke and Stewart (2013) for
further reading.
Nucleus
The nucleus (see Figs 1.11.2) is generally the largest intracellular structure
and is usually spherical or ellipsoid in shape, with a diameter of
310 m. Conventional histological stains, such as haematoxylin or
toluidine blue, detect the acidic components (phosphate groups) of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) in cells and
tissue sections. DNA and RNA molecules are said to be basophilic
because of the binding affinity of their negatively charged phosphate
groups to basic dyes such as haematoxylin. A specific stain for DNA is
the Feulgen reaction.
Nuclear envelope
The nucleus is surrounded by the nuclear envelope, which consists of
an inner nuclear membrane (INM) and an outer nuclear membrane
(ONM), separated by a 4050 nm perinuclear space that is spanned by
nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). The perinuclear space is continuous
with the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. The ONM has multiple
connections with the endoplasmic reticulum, with which it shares its
membrane protein components. The INM contains its own specific
integral membrane proteins (lamin B receptor and emerin, both providing
binding sites for chromatin bridging proteins). A mutation in
the gene encoding emerin causes X-linked EmeryDreifuss muscular
dystrophy (EDMD), characterized by skeletal muscle wasting and
cardiomyopathy.
The nuclear lamina, a 1520 nm thick, protein-dense meshwork, is
associated with the inner face of the INM. The major components of
the nuclear lamina are lamins, the type V intermediate filament proteins
consisting of A-type and B-type classes.
The nuclear lamina reinforces the nuclear membrane mechanically,
determines the shape of the nucleus and provides a binding site for a
range of proteins that anchor chromatin to the cytoskeleton. Nuclear
lamin A, with over 350 mutations, is the most mutated protein linked
to human disease. These are referred to as laminopathies, characterized
by nuclear structural abnormalities that cause structurally weakened
nuclei, leading to mechanical damage. Lamin A mutations cause a
(anterograde axonal transport) and membrane-bound vesicles are
returned for recycling to the neuronal soma (retrograde axonal transport)
(p. 45). In addition to anterograde and retrograde motor proteins,
the assembly and maintenance of all cilia and flagella involve the participation
of non-membrane-bound macromolecular protein complexes
called intraflagellar transport (IFT) particles. IFT particles localize
along the polarized microtubules of the axoneme, beneath the ciliary
and flagellar membrane. IFT particles consist of two protein subcomplexes:
IFT-A (with a role in returning cargoes from the tip of the
axoneme to the cell body) and IFT-B (with a role in delivering cargoes
from the cell body to the tip of the axoneme). For further reading, see
Scholey (2008) and Hao and Scholey (2009).
During ciliogenesis, IFT requires the anterograde kinesin-2 motor
and the retrograde IFT-dynein motor to transport IFT particlescargo
complexes in opposite directions along the microtubules, from the
basal body to the tip of the ciliary axoneme and back again (intraciliary
transport). IFT is not just restricted to microtubules of cilia and flagella.
During spermatid development, IFT particlesmotor proteincargo
complexes appear to utilize microtubules of the manchette, a transient
microtubule-containing structure, to deliver tubulin dimers and other
proteins by intramanchette transport during the development of the
spermatid tail (Kierszenbaum et al 2011). IFT also occurs along the
modified cilium of photoreceptor cells of the retina. Mutations in IFT
proteins lead to the absence of cilia and are lethal during embryogenesis.
Ciliopathies, many related to the defective sensory and/or mechanical
function of cilia, include retinal degeneration, polycystic kidney
disease, BardetBiedl syndrome, Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy,
respiratory disease and defective determination of the leftright axis.
The seven-protein complex designated BBSome (for BardetBiedl syndrome,
an obesity/retinopathy ciliopathy) is a component of the basal
body and participates in the formation of the primary cilium by regulating
the export and/or import of ciliary proteins. The transport of the
BBSome up and down and round about in cilia occurs in association
with anterograde IFT-B and retrograde IFT-A particles. For further
reading on the BBSome, see Jin and Nachury (2009). For further reading
on ciliogenesis, see Baldari and Rosenbaum (2010).
Intermediate filaments
Intermediate filaments are about 10 nm thick and are formed by a
heterogeneous group of filamentous proteins. In contrast to actin filaments
and microtubules, which are assembled from globular proteins
with nucleotide-binding and hydrolysing activity, intermediate filaments
consist of filamentous monomers lacking enzymatic activity.
Intermediate filament proteins assemble to form linear filaments in a
three-step process. First, a pair of intermediate filament protein subunits,
each consisting of a central -helical rod domain of about 310
amino acids flanked by head and tail non--helical domains of variable
size, form a parallel dimer through their central -helical rod
domains coiled around each other. The variability of intermediate filament
protein subunits resides in the length and amino-acid sequence
of the head and tail domains, thought to be involved in regulating the
interaction of intermediate filaments with other proteins. Second, a
tetrameric unit is formed by two antiparallel half-staggered coiled
dimers. Third, eight tetramers associate laterally to form a 16 nm thick
unit length filament (ULF). Individual ULFs join end to end to form
short filaments that continue growing longitudinally by annealing to
other ULFs and existing filaments. Filament elongation is followed by
internal compaction leading to the 30 nm thick intermediate filament
(see Fig. 1.8). The tight association of dimers, tetramers and ULFs provides
intermediate filaments with high tensile strength and resistance
to stretching, compression, twisting and bending forces. In contrast to
actin filaments and microtubules, intermediate filaments are nonpolar
(because of the antiparallel alignment of the initial tetramers)
and do not bind nucleotides
(as in G-actin and tubulin dimers), and
ULFs anneal end to end to each other (in contrast to the polarized
F-actin and microtubules, with one end, the plus end, growing faster
than the other end, the minus end). See Herrmann et al (2007) for
further reading.
Intermediate filaments are found in different cell types and are often
present in large numbers, either to provide structural strength where it
is needed (see Fig. 1.9B,C) or to provide scaffolding for the attachment
of other structures. Intermediate filaments form extensive cytoplasmic
networks extending from cage-like perinuclear arrangements to the cell
surface. Intermediate filaments of different molecular classes are characteristic
of particular tissues or states of maturity and are therefore
important indicators of the origins of cells or degrees of differentiation,
as well as being of considerable value in histopathology.
Intermediate filament proteins have been classified into five distinct
types on the basis of their primary structure and tissue-specific expresBasic structure and function of cells
15.e1
CHAPTER 1
A-type lamins include lamin A (interacting with emerin), lamin C,
lamin C2 and lamin A10 encoded by a single gene (LMNA). Lamin A
and lamin C are the major A-type lamins expressed in somatic cells,
whereas lamin C2 is expressed in testis. B-type lamins include lamin
B1 and lamin B2 (expressed in somatic cells), and testis-specific lamin
B3. Lamin B1 is encoded by the LMNB1 gene; lamin B2 is encoded by
the LMNB2 gene.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
16
SECTION 1
permeable to small molecules, ions and proteins up to about 17 kDa.
See Raices and DAngelo (2012) for further reading on nuclear pore
complex composition. Most proteins that enter the nucleus do so as
complexes with specific transport receptor proteins known as importins.
Importins shuttle back and forth between the nucleus and cytoplasm.
Binding of the cargo to the importin requires a short sequence
of amino acids known as a nuclear localization sequence (NLS), and
can either be direct or take place via an adapter protein. Interactions of
the importin with components of the nuclear pore move it, together
with its cargo, through the pore by an energy-independent process.
A complementary cycle functions in export of proteins and RNA molecules
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm using transport receptors
known as exportins.
A small GTPase called Ras-related nuclear protein (Ran) regulates the
import and export of proteins across the nuclear envelope.
For further reading on the Ran pathway and exportins/importins, see
Clarke and Zhang (2008) and Raices and DAngelo (2012).
Chromatin
DNA is organized within the nucleus in a DNAprotein complex known
as chromatin. The protein constituents of chromatin are the histones
and the non-histone proteins. Non-histone proteins are an extremely
heterogeneous group that includes structural proteins, DNA and RNA
polymerases, and gene regulatory proteins. Histones are the most abundant
group of proteins in chromatin, primarily responsible for the
packaging of chromosomal DNA into its primary level of organization,
the nucleosome. There are four core histone proteins  H2A, H2B, H3
and H4  which combine in equal ratios to form a compact octameric
nucleosome core. A fifth histone, H1, is involved in further compaction
of the chromatin. The DNA molecule (one per chromosome) winds
twice around each nucleosome core, taking up 165 nucleotide pairs.
This packaging organizes the DNA into a chromatin fibre 11 nm in
diameter, and imparts to this form of chromatin the electron microscopic
appearance of beads on a string, in which each bead is separated
by a variable length of DNA, typically about 35 nucleotide pairs long.
The nucleosome core region and one of the linker regions constitute
the nucleosome proper, which is typically about 200 nucleotide pairs
in length. However, chromatin rarely exists in this simple form and is
usually packaged further into a 30 nm thick fibre, involving a single H1
histone per nucleosome, which interacts with both DNA and protein
to impose a higher order of nucleosome packing. Usually, 30 nm thick
fibres are further coiled or folded into larger domains. Individual
domains are believed to decondense and extend during active transcription.
In a typical interphase nucleus, euchromatin (nuclear regions that
appear pale in appropriately stained tissue sections, or relatively
electron-lucent in electron micrographs; see Fig. 1.2) is likely to consist
mainly of 30 nm fibres and loops, and contains the transcriptionally
active genes. Transcriptionally active cells, such as most neurones, have
nuclei that are predominantly euchromatic. See Luger et al (2012) for
further reading on the nucleosome and chromatin structure.
Heterochromatin (nuclear regions that appear dark in appropriately
stained tissue sections or electron-dense in electron micrographs) is
characteristically located mainly around the periphery of the nucleus,
except over the nuclear pores (see Fig. 1.11A), and adjacent to the
nucleolus (see Fig. 1.2). It is a relatively compacted form of chromatin
in which the histone proteins carry a specific set of post-translational
modifications, including methylation at characteristic residues. This
facilitates the binding of specific heterochromatin-associated proteins.
Heterochromatin includes non-coding regions of DNA, such as centromeric
regions, which are known as constitutive heterochromatin. DNA
becomes transcriptionally inactive in some cells as they differentiate
during development or cell maturation, and contributes to heterochromatin;
it is known as facultative heterochromatin. The inactive X chromosome
in females is an example of facultative heterochromatin and
can be identified in the light microscope as the deeply staining Barr
body often located near the nuclear periphery or a drumstick extension
of a nuclear lobe of a mature multilobed neutrophil leukocyte.
In transcriptionally inactive cells, chromatin is predominantly in the
condensed, heterochromatic state, and may comprise as much as 90%
of the total. Examples of such cells are mature neutrophil leukocytes
(in which the condensed chromatin is present in a multilobular, densely
staining nucleus) and the highly condensed nuclei of orthochromatic
erythroblasts (late-stage erythrocyte precursors). In most mature cells,
a mixture of the two occurs, indicating that only a proportion of the
DNA is being transcribed. A particular instance of this is seen in the B
lymphocyte-derived plasma cell, in which much of the chromatin is in
the condensed condition and is arranged in regular masses around the
perimeter of the nucleus, producing the so-called clock-face nucleus
(see Figs 4.6, 4.12). Although this cell is actively transcribing, much of
surprisingly wide range of diseases, from progeria to various dystrophies,
including an autosomal dominant form of EDMD. A truncated
farnesylated form of lamin A, referred to as progerin, leads to defects
in cell proliferation and DNA damage of mesenchymal stem cells and
vascular smooth muscle cells. Affected patients display cardiovascular
disease and die at an early age. Mice lacking lamin B1 and lamin B2
survive until birth; however, neuronal development is compromised
when lamin B1 or lamin B2 is absent. Overexpression of lamin B1 is
associated with autosomal dominant leukodystrophy characterized by
gradual demyelination in the central nervous system. See Worman
(2012) and Burke and Stewart (2013) for additional reading on lamins
and laminopathies.
Condensed chromatin (heterochromatin) tends to aggregate near
the nuclear envelope during interphase. At the end of mitotic and
meiotic prophase (see below), the lamin filaments disassemble by
phosphorylation, causing the nuclear membranes to vesiculate and
disperse into the endoplasmic reticulum. During the final stages of
mitosis (telophase), proteins of the nuclear periphery, including lamins,
associate with the surface of the chromosomes, providing docking sites
for membrane vesicles. Fusion of these vesicles reconstitutes the nuclear
envelope, including the nuclear lamina, following lamin dephosphorylation.
See Simon and Wilson (2011) for further reading on the
nucleoskeleton.
The transport of molecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm
occurs via specialized nuclear pore structures that perforate the nuclear
membrane (Fig. 1.11A). They act as highly selective directional molecular
filters, permitting proteins such as histones and gene regulatory
proteins (which are synthesized in the cytoplasm but function in the
nucleus) to enter the nucleus, and molecules that are synthesized in the
nucleus but destined for the cytoplasm (e.g. ribosomal subunits, transfer
RNAs and messenger RNAs) to leave the nucleus.
Ultrastructurally, nuclear pores appear as disc-like structures with an
outer diameter of 130 nm and an inner pore with an effective diameter
for free diffusion of 9 nm (Fig. 1.11B). The nuclear envelope of an
active cell contains up to 4000 such pores. The nuclear pore complex
has an octagonal symmetry and is formed by an assembly of more than
50 proteins, the nucleoporins. The inner and outer nuclear membranes
fuse around the pore complex (see Fig. 1.11A). Nuclear pores are freely
Fig. 1.11 A, The nuclear envelope with nuclear pores (arrows) in
transverse section, showing the continuity between the inner and outer
phospholipid layers of the envelope on either side of the pore. The fine
membrane appearing to span the pore is formed by proteins of the pore
complex. Note that the chromatin is less condensed in the region of
nuclear pores. Abbreviations: N, nucleus; C, cytoplasm. B, Nuclear pores
seen en face as spherical structures (arrows) in a tangential section
through the nuclear envelope. The appearance of the envelope varies in
electron density as the plane of section passes through different regions
of the curved double membrane, which is interrupted at intervals by pores
through the envelope (see also Fig. 1.1). The surrounding cytoplasm with
ribosomes is less electron-dense. Human tissues. (Courtesy of Dr Bart
Wagner, Histopathology Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK.)
N
C
A
BCell structure
17
CHAPTER 1
easily seen during metaphase, although prophase chromosomes can be
used for more detailed analyses.
Lymphocytes separated from blood samples, or cells taken from
other tissues, are used as a source of chromosomes. Diagnosis of fetal
chromosome patterns is generally carried out on samples of amniotic
fluid containing fetal cells aspirated from the uterus by amniocentesis,
or on a small piece of chorionic villus tissue removed from the placenta.
Whatever their origin, the cells are cultured in vitro and stimulated to
divide by treatment with agents that stimulate cell division. Mitosis is
interrupted at metaphase with spindle inhibitors. The chromosomes are
dispersed by first causing the cells to swell in a hypotonic solution, then
the cells are gently fixed and mechanically ruptured on a slide to spread
the chromosomes. They are subsequently stained in various ways to
allow the identification of individual chromosomes by size, shape and
distribution of stain (Fig. 1.12). General techniques show the obvious
landmarks, e.g. lengths of arms and positions of constrictions. Banding
techniques demonstrate differential staining patterns, characteristic for
each chromosome type. Fluorescence staining with quinacrine mustard
and related compounds produces Q bands, and Giemsa staining (after
treatment that partially denatures the chromatin) gives G bands (Fig.
1.12A). Other less widely used methods include: reverse Giemsa staining,
in which the light and dark areas are reversed (R bands); the staining
of constitutive heterochromatin with silver salts (C-banding); and
T-banding to stain the ends (telomeres) of chromosomes. Collectively,
these methods permit the classification of chromosomes into numbered
autosomal pairs in order of decreasing size, from 1 to 22, plus
the sex chromosomes.
A summary of the major classes of chromosome is given in
Table 1.1.
Methodological advances in banding techniques improved the recognition
of abnormal chromosome patterns. The use of in situ hybridization
with fluorescent DNA probes specific for each chromosome (Fig.
1.12B) permits the identification of even very small abnormalities.
Nucleolus
Nucleoli are a prominent feature of an interphase nucleus (see Fig. 1.2).
They are the site of most of the synthesis of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and
assembly of ribosome subunits. Nucleoli organize at the end of mitosis
its protein synthesis is of a single immunoglobulin type, and consequently
much of its genome is in an inactive state.
During mitosis, the chromatin is further reorganized and condensed
to form the much-shortened chromosomes characteristic of metaphase.
This shortening is achieved through further levels of close packing of
the chromatin. The condensed chromosomes are stabilized by protein
complexes known as condensins. Progressive folding of the chromosomal
DNA by interactions with specific proteins can reduce 5 cm of
chromosomal DNA by 10,000-fold, to a length of 5 m in the mitotic
chromosome.
Chromosomes and telomeres
The nuclear DNA of eukaryotic cells is organized into linear units called
chromosomes. The DNA in a normal human diploid cell contains
6  109 nucleotide pairs organized in the form of 46 chromosomes (44
autosomes and 2 sex chromosomes). The largest human chromosome
(number 1) contains 2.5  108 nucleotide pairs, and the smallest (the Y
chromosome) 5  107 nucleotide pairs.
Each chromosomal DNA molecule contains a number of specialized
nucleotide sequences that are associated with its maintenance. One is
the centromeric DNA region. During mitosis, a disc-shaped structure
composed of a complex array of proteins, the kinetochore, forms as a
substructure at the centromeric region of DNA to which kinetochore
microtubules of the spindle attach. Another region, the telomere,
defines the end of each chromosomal DNA molecule. Telomeres consist
of hundreds of repeats of the nucleotide sequence (TTAGGG)n. The very
ends of the chromosomes cannot be replicated by the same DNA
polymerase as the rest of the chromosome, and are maintained by a
specific enzyme called telomerase, which contains an RNA subunit
acting as the template for lengthening the TTAGGG repeats. See
Nandakumar and Cech (2013) for further reading on the recruitment
of telomerase to telomeres. Thus telomerase is a specialized type of
polymerase known as a reverse transcriptase that turns sequences in
RNA back into DNA. The number of tandem repeats of the telomeric
DNA sequence varies. The telomere appears to shorten with successive
cell divisions because telomerase activity reduces or is absent in differentiated
cells with a finite lifespan. In mammals, telomerase is active
in the germ-cell lineage and in stem cells, but its expression in somatic
cells may lead to or prompt cancer. A lack of telomere maintenance
determines the shrinking of telomeres in proliferating cells to the point
when cells stop dividing, a condition known as replicative senescence.
See Sahin and DePinho (2012) for further reading on telomeres and
progressive DNA damage.
The role of the telomere in ageing and cell senescence is further
discussed at the end of this chapter.
Karyotypes: classification of human chromosomes
A number of genetic abnormalities can be directly related to the chromosomal
pattern. The characterization or karyotyping of chromosome
number and structure is therefore of considerable diagnostic importance.
The identifying features of individual chromosomes are most
Fig. 1.12 Chromosomes from normal males, arranged as karyotypes. A, G-banded preparation. B, Preparation stained by multiplex fluorescence in situ
hybridization to identify each chromosome. (Courtesy of Dr Denise Sheer, Cancer Research UK.)
1
6
13
19 20 21 22 X Y
14 15 16 17 18
7 8 9 10 11 12
2 3 4 5
A
1
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 X Y
2 3 4 5
B
Table 1.1 Summary of the major classes of chromosome
Group Features
13 (A) Large metacentric chromosomes
45 (B) Large submetacentric chromosomes
612 + X (C) Metacentrics of medium size
1315 (D) Medium-sized acrocentrics with satellites
1618 (E) Shorter metacentrics (16) or submetacentrics (17,18)
1920 (F) Shortest metacentrics
2122 + Y (G) Short acrocentrics; 21, 22 with satellites, Y withoutBasic structure and function of cells
17.e1
CHAPTER 1
Telomerase has been associated with ageing and cell senescence
because a gradual loss of telomeres may lead to tissue atrophy, stem
cell depletion and deficient tissue repair or regeneration. Mutations
causing loss of function of telomerase or the RNA-containing template
have been associated with dyskeratosis congenita (characterized by
abnormal skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy and mucosal leukoplasia),
aplastic anaemia and pulmonary fibrosis.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
18
SECTION 1
certain tumour suppressor genes (e.g. the gene mutated in retinoblastoma,
Rb) block the cycle in G1. DNA synthesis (replication of the
genome) occurs during S phase, at the end of which the DNA content
of the cell has doubled. During G2, the cell prepares for division; this
period ends with the onset of chromosome condensation and breakdown
of the nuclear envelope. The times taken for S, G2 and M are
similar for most cell types, and occupy 68, 24 and 12 hours respectively.
In contrast, the duration of G1 shows considerable variation,
sometimes ranging from less than 2 hours in rapidly dividing cells to
more than 100 hours, within the same tissue.
The passage of a cell through the cell cycle is controlled by proteins
in the cytoplasm: cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks; Fig
1.13). Cyclins include G1 cyclins (D cyclins), S-phase cyclins (cyclins E
and A) and mitotic cyclins (B cyclins). Cdks, protein kinases, which are
activated by binding of a cyclin subunit, include G1 Cdk (Cdk4), an
S-phase Cdk (Cdk2) and an M-phase Cdk (Cdk1). Cell cycle progression
is driven in part by changes in the activity of Cdks. Each cell cycle
stage is characterized by the activity of one or more Cdkcyclin pairs.
Transitions between cell cycle stages are triggered by highly specific
proteolysis by the 26S proteasome of the cyclins and other key
components.
To give one example, the transition from G2 to mitosis is driven by
activation of Cdk1 by its partners, the A- and B-type cyclins; the characteristic
changes in cellular structure that occur as cells enter mitosis
are largely driven by phosphorylation of proteins by active Cdk1-cyclin
A and Cdk1-cyclin B. Cells exit from mitosis when an E3 ubiquitin
ligase, the anaphase promoting complex, also called cyclosome
(APC/C), marks the cyclins for destruction. In addition, APC/C prompts
the degradation of the mitotic cyclin B and the destruction of cohesins,
thus allowing sister chromatids to separate.
There are important checkpoints in the cell cycle (see Fig. 1.13).
Checkpoint 1 requires G1 cyclins to bind to their corresponding Cdks
to signal the cell to prepare for DNA synthesis. S-phase promoting
factor (SPF; cyclin A bound to Cdk2) enters the nucleus to stimulate
DNA synthesis. Checkpoint 2 requires M-phase promoting factor
(mitotic cyclin B bound to M-phase Cdk1) to trigger the assembly of
the mitotic spindle, breakdown of the nuclear envelope, arrest of gene
transcription and condensation of chromosomes. During metaphase of
mitosis, M-phase promoting factor activates APC/C, which determines
the breakdown of cohesins, the protein complex holding sister chromatids
together. Then, at anaphase, separated chromatids move to the
opposite poles of the spindle. Finally, B cyclins are destroyed following
and consist of repeated clusters of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes and
processing molecules responsible for producing ribosome subunits. The
initial step of the assembly of a ribosome subunit starts with the transcription
of rDNA genes by RNA polymerase I. The rDNA genes,
arranged in tandem repeats called nucleolar organizing regions (NORs),
are located on acrocentric chromosomes. There are five pairs of acrocentric
chromosomes in humans. The initial 47S rRNA precursor transcript
is cleaved to form the mature 28S, 18S and 5.8S rRNAs, assembled
with the 5S rRNA (synthesized by RNA polymerase III outside the
nucleolus) and coupled to small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins and
other non-ribosomal proteins to form 60S (containing 28S rRNA, 5.8S
rRNA and 5S rRNA) and 40S (containing 18S rRNA) preribosome subunits.
These are then exported to the cytoplasm across nuclear pores as
mature ribosome subunits. About 726 human nucleolar proteins have
been identified by protein purification and mass spectrometry. For
further reading on nucleolar functions, see Boisvert et al (2007).
Ribosomal biogenesis occurs in distinct subregions of the nucleolus,
visualized by electron microscopy. The three nucleolar subregions are
fibrillar centres (FCs), dense fibrillar components (DFCs) and granular
components (GCs). Transcription of the rDNA repeats takes place at
the FC-DFC boundary; pools of RNA polymerase I reside in the FC
region; processing of transcripts and coupling to small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins
take place in DFC; and the assembly of ribosome subunits
is completed in the GC region.
The nucleolus is disassembled when cells enter mitosis and transcription
becomes inactive. It reforms after nuclear envelope reorganization
in telophase, in a process associated with the onset of transcription
in nucleolar organizing centres on each specific chromosome, and
becomes functional during the G1 phase of the cell cycle. An adequate
pool of ribosome subunits during cell growth and cell division requires
steady nucleolar activity to support protein synthesis. Several DNA
helicases, a conserved group of enzymes that unwind DNA, accumulate
in the nucleolus under specific conditions such as Blooms syndrome
(an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by growth deficiency,
immunodeficiency and a predisposition to cancer) and Werners syndrome
(an autosomal recessive condition characterized by the early
appearance of various age-related diseases).
CELL DIVISION AND THE CELL CYCLE
During prenatal development, most cells undergo repeated division
(see Video 1.1) as the body grows in size and complexity. As cells
mature, they differentiate structurally and functionally. Some cells, such
as neurones, lose the ability to divide. Others may persist throughout
the lifetime of the individual as replication-competent stem cells, e.g.
cells in the haemopoietic tissue of bone marrow. Many stem cells divide
infrequently, but give rise to daughter cells that undergo repeated cycles
of mitotic division as transit (or transient) amplifying cells. Their divisions
may occur in rapid succession, as in cell lineages with a short
lifespan and similarly fast turnover and replacement time. Transit
amplifying cells are all destined to differentiate and ultimately to die
and be replaced, unlike the population of parental stem cells, which
self-renews.
Patterns and rates of cell division within tissues vary considerably.
In many epithelia, such as the crypts between intestinal villi, the replacement
of damaged or ageing cells by division of stem cells can be rapid.
Rates of cell division may also vary according to demand, as occurs in
the healing of wounded skin, in which cell proliferation increases to a
peak and then returns to the normal replacement level. The rate of cell
division is tightly coupled to the demand for growth and replacement.
Where this coupling is faulty, tissues either fail to grow or replace their
cells, or they can overgrow, producing neoplasms.
The cell cycle is an ordered sequence of events, culminating in cell
growth and division to produce two daughter cells. It generally lasts a
minimum of 12 hours, but in most adult tissues can be considerably
longer, and is divided into four distinct phases, which are known as G1
(for gap 1), S (for DNA synthesis), G2 (for gap 2) and M (for mitosis).
The combination of G1, S and G2 phases is known as interphase. M is
the mitotic phase, which is further divided into four phases (see below).
G1 is the period when cells respond to growth factors directing the cell
to initiate another cycle; once made, this decision is irreversible. It is
also the phase in which most of the molecular machinery required to
complete another cell cycle is generated. Centrosomes duplicate during
S phase in preparation for mitosis. Cells that retain the capacity for
proliferation, but which are no longer dividing, have entered a phase
called G0 and are described as quiescent even though they may be quite
active physiologically. Growth factors can stimulate quiescent cells to
leave G0 and re-enter the cell cycle, whereas the proteins encoded by
Fig. 1.13 The cell cycle consists of an interphase (G1 phase, S phase and
G2 phase) followed by mitosis. The cyclin D/Cdk4 complex assembles at
the beginning of G1; the cyclin E/Cdk2 complex assembles near the end
of G1 as the cell is preparing to cross checkpoint 1 to start DNA synthesis
(during S phase). The cyclin A/Cdk2 complex assembles as DNA
synthesis starts. Completion of G2 is indicated by the assembled cyclin A/
Cdk1 complex. A cell crosses checkpoint 2 to initiate mitosis when the
cyclin B/Cdk1 complex assembles. The cyclin B/Cdk1 complex is
degraded by the 26S proteasome and an assembled cyclin D/Cdk4 marks
the start of the G1 phase of a new cell cycle. For details, see text.
(Modified with permission from Kierszenbaum AL, Tres LL. Histology and
Cell Biology: An Introduction to Pathology. 3rd ed, Philadelphia: Elsevier,
Saunders; 2011.)
Cyclin A
Cyclin D
Cyclin E
Cyclin A
Cdk2 Cdk4
Cdk2
Cdk1
Mitosis
S
Cyclin B
Cdk1
G2
G 1
Checkpoint 1
Checkpoint 2Basic structure and function of cells
18.e1
CHAPTER 1
The targets for proteolysis are marked for destruction by E3 ubiquitin
ligases, which decorate them with polymers of the small protein ubiquitin,
a sign for recognition by the 26S proteasome.Cell division and the cell cycle
19
CHAPTER 1
their attachment to ubiquitin, targeting them for destruction by the 26S
proteasome. As G1 starts, cyclins D, bound to Cdk4, start preparation
for a new cell cycle.
Quality control checkpoint 2 operates to delay cell-cycle progression
when DNA has been damaged by radiation or chemical mutagens. Cells
with checkpoint defects, such as loss of the protein p53, which is a
major negative control element in the division cycle of all cells, are
commonly associated with the development of malignancy. An example
is Li Fraumeni syndrome, where a defective p53 gene leads to a high
frequency of cancer in affected individuals. In cells, p53 protein binds
DNA and stimulates another gene to produce p21 protein, which interacts
with Cdk2 to prevent S-phase promoting activity. When mutant
p53 can no longer bind DNA to stimulate production of p21 to stop
DNA synthesis, cells acquire oncogenic properties. The p53 gene is an
example of a tumour suppressor gene. For further reading on p53 mutations
and cancer, see Muller and Vousden (2013).
Mitosis and meiosis
Mitosis is the process that results in the distribution of identical copies
of the parent cell genome to the two daughter somatic cells. In meiosis,
the divisions immediately before the final production of gametes halve
the number of chromosomes to the haploid number, so that at fertilization
the diploid number is restored. Moreover, meiosis includes a phase
in which exchange of genetic material occurs between homologous
chromosomes. This allows a rearrangement of genes to take place,
which means that the daughter cells differ from the parental cell in both
their precise genetic sequence and their haploid state. Mitosis and
meiosis are alike in many respects, and differ principally in chromosomal
behaviour during the early stages of cell division. In meiosis, two
divisions occur in succession, without an intervening S phase. Meiosis
I is distinct from mitosis, whereas meiosis II is more like mitosis.
Mitosis
New DNA is synthesized during the S phase of the cell cycle interphase.
This means that the amount of DNA in diploid cells has doubled to
the tetraploid value by the onset of mitosis, although the chromosome
number is still diploid. During mitosis, this amount is halved between
the two daughter cells, so that DNA quantity and chromosome number
are diploid in both cells. The cellular changes that achieve this distribution
are conventionally divided into four phases called prophase, metaphase,
anaphase and telophase (Figs 1.141.15, Video 1.1).
Prophase
During prophase, the strands of chromatin, which are highly extended
during interphase, shorten, thicken and resolve themselves into recognizable
chromosomes. Each chromosome is made up of duplicate chromatids
(the products of DNA replication) joined at their centromeres.
Outside the nucleus, the two centriole pairs begin to separate, and move
towards opposite poles of the cell. Parallel microtubules are assembled
between them to create the mitotic spindle, and others radiate to form
the microtubule asters, which come to form the spindle poles or mitotic
centre. As prophase proceeds, the nucleoli disappear, and the nuclear
envelope suddenly disintegrates to release the chromosomes, an event
that marks the end of prophase.
Prometaphasemetaphase
As the nuclear envelope disappears, the spindle microtubules extend
into the central region of the cell, attaching to the chromosomes, which
subsequently move towards the equator of the spindle (prometaphase).
The spindle consists of kinetochore microtubules attached to the kinetochore,
a multiprotein structure assembled at the centromeric DNA
region, and polar microtubules, which are not attached to chromosomes
but instead overlap with each other at the centre of the cell. The
grouping of chromosomes at the spindle equator is called the metaphase
or equatorial plate. The chromosomes, attached at their centromeres,
appear to be arranged in a ring when viewed from either pole
of the cell, or to lie linearly across this plane when viewed from above.
Cytoplasmic movements during late metaphase effect the approximately
equal distribution of mitochondria and other cell structures
around the cell periphery.
Anaphase
By the end of metaphase every chromosome consists of a pair of sister
chromatids attached to opposing spindle poles by bundles of microtubules
associated with the kinetochore. The onset of anaphase begins
with the proteolytic cleavage by the enzyme separase of a key subunit
of protein complexes known as cohesins. The latter hold the replicated
sister chromatids together to resist separation even when exposed to
Fig. 1.14 The stages in mitosis, including the appearance and distribution
of the chromosomes.
Prophase
Nuclear
membrane
Centromere
Two sister
chromatids
attached at
centromere
Microtubules
of spindle
Centriole centre
of aster (or spindle pole)
Prometaphase
Spindle pole
Nuclear
membrane
vesicles
Microtubule
Metaphase
Cell equator
Anaphase
Chromatids pulled
toward pole of spindle
as their microtubules
shorten
Telophase
Nuclear membrane
reforms
Chromosomes decondense and
detach from microtubules
Cytokinesis
Nuclear
membrane
Centriole
Actinmyosin belt
microtubule-dependent pulling forces. Proteolytic cleavage releases the
cohesion between sister chromatids, which then move towards opposite
spindle poles while the microtubule bundles attached to the kinetochores
shorten and move polewards. At the end of anaphase the sister
chromatids are grouped at either end of the cell, and both clusters areBasic str uct ure and function of ce lls
20
SECTION 1
diploid in number. An infolding of the cell equator begins, deepening
during telophase as the cleavage furrow.
Telophase
During telophase the nuclear envelopes reform, beginning with the
association of membranous vesicles with the surface of the chromosomes.
Later, after the vesicles have fused and the nuclear envelope is
complete, the chromosomes decondense and the nucleoli reform. At
the same time, cytoplasmic division, which usually begins in early
anaphase, continues until the new cells separate, each with its derived
nucleus. The spindle remnant now disintegrates. While the cleavage
furrow is active, a peripheral band or belt of actin and myosin appears
in the constricting zone; contraction of this band is responsible for
furrow formation.
Failure of disjunction of chromatids, so that sister chromatids pass
to the same pole, may sometimes occur. Of the two new cells, one will
have more, and the other fewer, chromosomes than the diploid number.
Exposure to ionizing radiation promotes non-disjunction and may, by
chromosomal damage, inhibit mitosis altogether. A typical symptom of
radiation exposure is the failure of rapidly dividing epithelia to replace
lost cells, with consequent ulceration of the skin and mucous membranes.
Mitosis can also be disrupted by chemical agents, particularly
vinblastine, paclitaxel (taxol) and their derivatives. These compounds
either disassemble spindle microtubules or interfere with their dynamics,
so that mitosis is arrested in metaphase.
Meiosis
There are two consecutive cell divisions during meiosis: meiosis I and
meiosis II (Fig. 1.16). Details of this process differ at a cellular level for
male and female lineages.
Fig. 1.15
Immunofluorescence
images of stages in
mitosis in human
carcinoma cells in
culture. A, Metaphase,
with spindle
microtubules (green),
the microtubulestabilizing
protein
(HURP; red) and
chromosomal DNA
(blue). B, Anaphase,
with spindle
microtubules (green),
the central spindle
(Aurora-B kinase, red)
and segregated
chromosomes (blue).
C, Late anaphase, with
spindle microtubules
(green), the central
spindle (Plk1 kinase,
red, appearing yellow
where co-localized with
microtubule protein)
and segregated
chromosomes (blue).
(Courtesy of Dr Herman
Sillj, Max-Planck-
Institut fr Biochemie,
Martinsried, Germany.)
A
B
C
Fig. 1.16 The stages in meiosis, depicted by two pairs of maternal and paternal homologues (dark and pale colours). DNA and chromosome
complement changes and exchange of genetic information between homologues are indicated.
Pairing of
paternal and
maternal
homologues
B
A Events preceding meiosis
B Meiotic prophase
C Meiosis I
D Meiosis II
Premeiotic
S phase
Centromere
Meiotic
prophase
Paired sister
centromeres
Meiosis I
Leptotene Zygotene Pachytene Diplotene Diakinesis
A a
b
A
a
b
B
Metaphase I Anaphase I
Prophase II Metaphase II
A
a
B
b
A
a b
B
Chiasmata
Meiosis I Meiosis II
Interphase
(no S phase)
A
b
B
a
A
a
B
b
Anaphase II Haploid gametesCell polarity and domains
21
CHAPTER 1
equatorial plane of the spindle. The centromeres of each pair of sister
chromatids function as a single unit, facing a single spindle pole.
Homologous chromosomes are pulled towards opposite spindle poles,
but are held paired at the spindle midzone by chiasmata. Errors in
chromosome segregation (known as non-disjunction) lead to the production
of aneuploid progeny. Most human aneuploid embryos are
non-viable and this is the major cause of fetal loss (spontaneous abortion),
particularly during the first trimester of pregnancy in humans.
The most common form of viable aneuploid progeny in humans is
Downs syndrome (trisomy for chromosome 21), which exhibits a dramatic
increase with maternal age.
Anaphase and telophase I
Anaphase I of meiosis begins with the release of cohesion between the
arms of sister chromatids, much as it does during mitosis. As positioning
of bivalent pairs is random, assortment of maternal and paternal
chromosomes in each telophase nucleus is also random. Critically,
sister centromeres, and thus chromatids, do not separate during anaphase
I.
During meiosis I, cytoplasmic division occurs by specialized mechanisms.
In females, the division is highly asymmetric, producing one egg
and one tiny cell known as a polar body. In males, the process results
in production of spermatocytes that remain joined by small cytoplasmic
bridges.
Meiosis II
Meiosis II commences after only a short interval during which no DNA
synthesis occurs. The centromeres of sister chromatids remain paired,
but rotate so that each one can face an opposite spindle pole. Onset of
anaphase II is triggered by loss of cohesion between the centromeres,
as it is in mitosis. This second division is more like mitosis, in that
chromatids separate during anaphase, but, unlike mitosis, the separating
chromatids are genetically different (the result of genetic recombination).
Cytoplasmic division also occurs and thus, in the male, four
haploid cells, interconnected by cytoplasmic bridges, result from
meiosis I and II.
CELL POLARITY AND DOMAINS
Epithelia are organized into sheets or glandular structures with very
different environments on either side. These cells actively transfer macromolecules
and ions between the two surfaces and are thus polarized
in structure and function. In polarized cells, particularly in epithelia,
the cell is generally subdivided into domains that reflect the polarization
of activities within it. The free surface, e.g. that facing the intestinal
lumen or airway, is the apical surface, and its adjacent cytoplasm is the
apical cell domain. This is where the cell interfaces with a specific body
compartment (or, in the case of the epidermis, with the outside world).
The apical surface is specialized to act as a barrier, restricting access of
substances from this compartment to the rest of the body. Specific
components are selectively absorbed from, or added to, the external
compartment by the active processes, respectively, of active transport
and endocytosis inwardly or exocytosis and secretion outwardly.
The apical surface is often covered with small protrusions of the cell
surface, microvilli, which increase the surface area, particularly for
absorption.
The surface of the cell opposite to the apical surface is the basal
surface, with its associated basolateral cell domain. In a single-layered
epithelium, this surface faces the basal lamina. The remaining surfaces
are known as the lateral cell surfaces. In many instances, the lateral and
basal surfaces perform similar functions and the cellular domain is
termed the basolateral domain. Cells actively transport substances, such
as digested nutrients from the intestinal lumen or endocrine secretions,
across their basal (or basolateral) surfaces into the subjacent connective
tissue matrix and the blood capillaries within it. Dissolved non-polar
gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide) diffuse freely between the cell and
the blood stream across the basolateral surface. Apical and basolateral
surfaces are separated by a tight intercellular seal, the tight junction
(occluding junction, zonula adherens), which prevents the passage of
even small ions through the space between adjacent cells and thus
maintains the difference between environments on either side of the
epithelium.
Cell surface apical differentiations
The surfaces of many different types of cell are specialized to form
structures that project from the surface. These projections may permit
Meiosis I
Prophase I
Meiotic prophase I is a long and complex phase that differs considerably
from mitotic prophase and is customarily divided into five substages,
called leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis.
There are three distinctive features of male meiotic prophase that are
not seen during mitotic prophase: the pairing, or synapse, of homologous
chromosomes of paternal and maternal origin to form bivalent
structures; the organization of nucleoli by autosomal bivalents; and
significant non-ribosomal RNA synthesis by autosomal bivalents (in
contrast to the transcriptional inactivity of the XY chromosomal pair)
(see Tres 2005). In the female, meiotic prophase I starts during fetal
gonadogenesis, is arrested at the diplotene stage and resumes at puberty.
In the male, meiosis starts at puberty.
Leptotene stage During leptotene, homologous chromosomes
(maternal and paternal copies of the same chromosome), replicated in
a preceding S phase and each consisting of sister chromatids joined at
the centromere (see above), locate one another within the nucleus, and
the process of genetic recombination is initiated. Cytologically, chromosomes
begin to condense, appearing as individual threads that are
attached via their telomeres to the nuclear envelope. They often show
characteristic beading throughout their length.
Zygotene stage During zygotene, the homologous chromosomes
initiate pairing or synapsis, during which they become intimately associated
with one another. Synapsis may begin near the telomeres at the
inner surface of the nuclear membrane, and during this stage the telomeres
often cluster to one side of the nucleus (a stage known as the
bouquet because the chromosomes resemble a bouquet of flowers). The
pairs of synapsed homologues, also known as bivalents, are linked
together by a tripartite ribbon, the synaptonemal complex, which consists
of two lateral dense elements and a central, less dense, linear
element.
The sex chromosomes also start to synapse during zygotene. In
males, with distinct X and Y chromosomes, synapsis involves a region
of shared DNA sequence known as the pseudoautosomal region. The
XY bivalent adopts a special condensed structure, known as the sex
vesicle, which becomes associated later at pachytene with migratory
nucleolar masses originating in the autosomal bivalents.
Chromosome behaviour in meiosis is intimately linked with the
process of genetic recombination. This begins during leptotene, as
homologous chromosomes first locate one another at a distance. Synapsis,
stabilized by the synaptonemal complex, facilitates recombination,
as sites of genetic exchange are turned into specialized structures
known as chiasmata, which are topological crossing-over points that
hold homologous chromosomes together.
Pachytene stage When synapsis is complete for all chromosomes,
the cell is said to be in pachytene. Each bivalent looks like a single thick
structure, but is actually two pairs of sister chromatids held together by
the synaptonemal complex. Genetic recombination between non-sister
chromatids is completed at this point, with sites where it has occurred
(usually one per chromosome arm) appearing as recombination
nodules in the centre of the synaptonemal complex.
Diplotene stage During diplotene, the synaptonemal complex disassembles
and pairs of homologous chromosomes, now much shortened,
separate, except where crossing over has occurred (chiasmata). This
process is called disjunction. At least one chiasma forms between each
homologous pair, exchanging maternal and paternal sequences; up to
five have been observed. In the ovaries, primary oocytes become diplotene
by the fifth month in utero and each remains at this stage until the
period before ovulation (up to 50 years).
Diakinesis Diakinesis is the prometaphase of the first meiotic division.
The chromosomes, still as bivalents, become even shorter and
thicker. They gradually attach to the spindle and become aligned at a
metaphase plate. In eggs, the spindle forms without centrosomes.
Microtubules first nucleate and are stabilized near the chromosomes;
the action of various motor molecules eventually sorts them into a
bipolar spindle. Perhaps surprisingly, this spindle is as efficient a
machine for chromosome segregation as the spindle of mitotic cells
with centrosomes at the poles.
Metaphase I
Metaphase I resembles mitotic metaphase, except that the bodies attaching
to the spindle microtubules are bivalents, not single chromosomes.
These become arranged so that the homologous pairs occupy theBasic str uct ure and function of ce lls
22
SECTION 1
its distal region, called the transition zone. The continued elongation
of the cilium requires the import and intraciliary transport of tubulin
dimers to the distal tip by bidirectional motor-driven proteins of the
intraflagellar transport complex.
The constant length of cilia is maintained by a steady-state balance
between tubulin turnover and addition of new tubulin dimers at the
ciliary tip.
Several filamentous structures are associated with the 9 + 2 doublet
microtubule of the axoneme in the cilium or flagellum shaft, e.g. radial
spokes extend inwards from the outer doublet microtubules towards
the central pair, surrounded by an inner sheath (see Fig. 1.17). The outer
doublet microtubules bear two rows of tangential dynein arms attached
to the complete A subfibre of the doublet (consisting of 13 protofilaments),
which point towards the incomplete B subfibre of the adjacent
doublet (consisting of 1011 protofilaments). Adjacent doublets are
also linked by thin nexin filaments. Tektins are scaffolding filamentous
proteins extending along the axonemal microtubules.
In motile cilia, arrays of dynein arms with ATPase activity cause outer
microtubule doublets to move past one another, resulting in a largescale
bending motion. Microtubules do not change in length. Movements
of cilia and flagella are broadly similar. In addition to the
axoneme, spermatozoan flagella have outer dense fibres and a fibrous
sheath surrounding the axoneme. Flagella move by rapid undulation,
which passes from the attached to the free end. In human spermatozoa,
there is an additional helical component to this motion. In cilia, the
beating is planar but asymmetric. In the effective stroke, the cilium
remains stiff except at the base, where it bends to produce an oar-like
stroke. The recovery stroke follows, during which the bend passes from
base to tip, returning the cilium to its initial position for the next cycle.
The activity of groups of cilia is usually coordinated so that the bending
of one is rapidly followed by the bending of the next and so on,
movement of the cell itself (flagella), or of fluids across the apical cell
surface (cilia), or increase the surface area available for absorption
(microvilli). Infoldings of the basolateral plasma membrane also
increase the area for transport across this surface of the cell. In most
non-dividing epithelial cells, the centriole-derived basal body gives rise
to a non-motile primary cilium, which has an important mechanosensory
role.
Cilia and flagella
Cilia and flagella are motile, hair-like projections of the cell surface,
which create currents in the surrounding fluid or movements of the cell
to which they are attached, or both. There are two categories of cilia:
single non-motile primary cilia and multiple motile cilia. Primary cilia
are immotile but can detect physical and biochemical signals. Motile
cilia are present in large numbers on the apical epithelial domain of
the upper respiratory tract and oviducts, and beat in a wave-like motion
to generate fluid movement. Cilia also occur, in modified form, at the
dendritic endings of olfactory receptor cells, vestibular hair cells (kinocilium),
and the photoreceptor rods and cones of the retina. Flagella,
with a primary function in cell locomotion, are found on single-cell
eukaryotes and in spermatozoa, which each possess a single flagellum
70 m long.
A cilium or flagellum consists of a shaft (0.25 m diameter) constituting
most of its length, a tapering tip and a basal body at its base,
which lies within the surface cytoplasm of the cell (Fig. 1.17). Other
than at its base, the entire structure of the cilium is covered by plasma
membrane. The core of the cilium is the axoneme, a cylinder of nine
microtubule doublets that surrounds a central pair of single microtubules
(see Fig. 1.17). Ciliogenesis of primary cilia and motile cilia
involves distinct steps. A centriole-derived basal body migrates to the
apical cell domain and axonemal microtubule doublets emerge from
Fig. 1.17 A, The structure of a cilium shown in longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) section. A and B are subfibres of the peripheral microtubule
doublets (see text); the basal body is structurally similar to a centriole, but with microtubule triplets. B, The apical region of respiratory epithelial cells,
showing the proximal parts of three cilia sectioned longitudinally, anchored into the cytoplasm by basal bodies (BB). Other cilia project out of the plane
of section and are cut transversely, showing the 9 + 2 arrangement of microtubules. (B, With permission from Young B, Heath JW. Wheaters Functional
Histology. 4th ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone; 2000.)
Inner sheath
Central
microtubules
Dynein arms
Rootlet
A
Microtubule
doublets
Nexin-linking
protein
Radial spoke
A
B
Tubulin subunits
Microtubule
triplets
Plasma membrane
Basal body
B
BB
BBBasic structure and function of cells
22.e1
CHAPTER 1
As indicated on page 15, the IFT-B protein complex participates in
intraciliary/intraflagellar anterograde transport of cargoes, a step essential
for the assembly and maintenance of cilia and flagella; the IFT-A
protein complex is required for retrograde transport of cargoes to the
cell body for turnover. The movement of IFT proteins along microtubules
is catalysed by kinesin-2 (towards the ciliary tip; anterograde
direction) and cytoplasmic dynein-2 motor proteins (towards the cell
body; retrograde direction). A cargo includes axonemal components,
ciliary/flagellar membrane proteins (including the BBSome) and ciliary
signal transduction proteins.Cell polarity and domains
23
CHAPTER 1
resulting in long travelling waves of metachronal synchrony. These pass
over the tissue surface in the same direction as the effective stroke.
Ciliary motion is important in clearing mucus from airways, moving
eggs along oviducts, and circulating cerebrospinal fluid in brain ventricles.
In the node of the developing embryo, cilium-driven flow is essential
for determining leftright visceral asymmetry (developing
patterning). Cilia also have a sensory function, determined by the presence
of receptor and channel proteins on the ciliary membrane. Primary
cilia in the collecting ducts of the uriniferous tubule sense the flow of
urine and also modulate duct morphogenesis. Cilia are essential for
signalling through the hedgehog pathway, a mechanism involved in
organizing the body plan, organogenesis and tumorigenesis in vertebrates.
For additional reading on hedgehog signalling and primary cilia,
see Briscoe and Thrond (2013).
There is a group of genetic diseases in which cilia beat either ineffectively
or not at all, e.g. Kartageners immotile cilia syndrome. Affected
cilia exhibit deficient function or a lack of dynein arms. Males are typically
sterile because of the loss of spermatozoan motility, and half have
an alimentary tract that is a mirror image of the usual pattern (situs
inversus), i.e. it rotates in the opposite direction during early development.
Defects in ciliary motility disrupt airway mucus clearance, leading
to chronic sinusitis and bronchiectasis. Defects in sensory cilia determine
polycystic kidney disease, anosmia and retinal degeneration.
Microvilli
Microvilli are finger-like cell surface extensions usually 0.1 m in diameter
and up to 2 m long (Fig. 1.18).
Microvilli are covered by plasma membrane and supported internally
by closely packed bundles of actin filaments linked by crossbridges
of the actin-bundling proteins, fascin and fimbrin. Other
bridges composed of myosin I and calmodulin connect the filament
bundles to the plasma membrane. At the tip of each microvillus, the
free ends of microfilaments are inserted into a dense mass that includes
the protein, villin. The actin filament bundles of microvilli are embedded
in the apical cytoplasm amongst a meshwork of transversely
running actin filaments stabilized by spectrin to form the terminal web,
which is underlain by keratin intermediate filaments. The web is
anchored laterally to the tight junctions and zonula adherens of the
apical epithelial junctional complex. Myosin II and tropomyosin are
also found in the terminal web, which may explain its contractile
activity.
Microvilli greatly increase the area of cell surface (up to 40 times),
particularly at sites of active absorption. In the small intestine, they have
a very thick cell coat or glycocalyx, which reflects the presence of integral
membrane glycoproteins, including enzymes concerned with digestion
and absorption. Irregular microvilli, filopodia, are also found on the
surfaces of many types of cell, particularly free macrophages and fibroblasts,
where they may be associated with phagocytosis and cell motility.
For further reading on the cytoskeleton of microvilli, see Brown and
McKnight (2010).
Long and branching microvilli are called stereocilia, an early misnomer,
as they are not motile and lack microtubules. An appropriate name
is stereovilli. They are found on cochlear and vestibular receptor cells,
where they act as sensory transducers, and also in the absorptive epithelium
of the epididymis.
Intercellular junctions
The basolateral region of the plasma membrane of epithelial cells establishes
junctions with adjacent cells and with structural components of
the extracellular matrix. Intercellular junctions are resilient and dynamic,
and prevent epithelial tissues from dissociating into their component
cells. In adults, the epidermis withstands imposed deformations because
of the interplay of two components of intercellular junctions, the junctional
cytoskeleton and cell adhesion molecules (Fig. 1.19). The establishment
and maintenance of cell polarity in an epithelial layer depends
on two circumferential apical belts, the tight junctions and the zonulae
adherentes, running in parallel to each other and associated with
F-actin. These two belts control epithelial permeability and determine
epithelial cell polarity. The apical cell domain resides above the belts;
the basolateral cell domain resides below the belts. Desmosomes
(maculae adherentes) are a third class of spot-like intercellular adhesion.
In contrast to tight junctions and the zonulae adherentes, desmosomes
do not form belts and link instead to intermediate filaments. The
hemidesmosome, anchoring epithelial cells to the basal lamina, also
links to intermediate filaments. Gap junctions are unique: they provide
direct connection between adjacent cells and are not linked to the
cytoskeleton. Molecular aspects of cell adhesion molecules will be considered
first and then integrated with the junctional cytoskeleton to
define specific structural and molecular aspects of different intercellular
junctions.
Cell adhesion molecules
Cell adhesion molecules are transmembrane or membrane-anchored
glycoproteins that bridge the intercellular space from the plasma membrane
to form adhesive contacts. There are a number of molecular
subgroups, which are broadly divisible on the basis of their dependence
on calcium for function. Calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecules
include cadherins and selectins. Calcium-independent cell adhesion
molecules include the immunoglobulin-like superfamily of cell adhesion
molecules (Ig-CAMs), including nectins, and integrins, the only
cell adhesion molecules consisting of two subunits ( and  subunits).
Calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecules:
cadherins and selectins
Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins, with five
heavily glycosylated calcium-binding external domains and an intracellular
catenin-binding cytoplasmic tail. Catenins are intracellular
proteins linking cadherins to F-actin in the belt-arranged zonula adherens.
The extracellular segment of cadherins participates in Ca2+-dependent
homophilic trans-interactions in which a cadherin molecule on one
cell binds to an identical cadherin molecule on an adjacent cell. After
binding, cadherins cluster laterally (cis-interaction) at cellcell junctions
to form a zipper-like structure that stabilizes tight adhesion
between cells.
Different cell types possess different members of the cadherin family,
e.g. N-cadherins in nervous tissue, E-cadherins in epithelia, and
P-cadherins in the placenta. Two further members of the cadherin
family are the desmogleins and the desmocollins. Cadherins are present
in macula adherens and desmosomes but not in tight junctions or
hemidesmosomes (see below). Alterations in the expression of cadherins
in the epidermis produce pathological conditions such as blisters
and ulcerations. See Brieher and Yap (2013) for further reading on
cadherins and their associated cytoskeleton.
As with cadherins, selectins are Ca2+-dependent. In contrast to cadherins,
selectins do not establish homophilic trans-interactions. Instead,
they bind to carbohydrates and belong to the group of lectins. Each
selectin has an extracellular carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD)
with binding affinity to a specific oligosaccharide attached to a protein
or lipid. The molecular configuration and binding affinity of the CRD
to carbohydrate moieties is Ca2+-dependent. Selectins participate in
the homing of leukocytes circulating in blood towards tissues by
Fig. 1.18 Microvilli sectioned longitudinally in the striated border of an
intestinal absorptive cell in a human duodenal biopsy specimen. Actin
filaments fill the cores of the microvilli and insert into the apical
cytoplasm. A prominent glycocalyx (formed by the extracellular domains
of plasma membrane glycoproteins) is seen as a fuzzy coat at the tips of
and between microvilli; it includes enzymes concerned with the final
stages of digestion. (Courtesy of Dr Bart Wagner, Histopathology
Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK.)Basic structure and function of cells
23.e1
CHAPTER 1
When arranged in a regular parallel series, as typified by the absorptive
surfaces of the epithelial enterocytes of the small intestine and the
proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron of the kidneys, microvilli
acquire a fuzzy appearance like the bristles of a paintbrush (the designations
brush border or striated border are used at the light microscope
level).
The cytoplasmic tail recruits proteins of the catenin complex:
-catenin is the first to be recruited and the cadherin-catenin complex
rapidly recruits -catenin; -catenin binds directly to F-actin and coordinates
the activity of actin nucleating proteins and actin binding partners
(such as vinculin and -actinin) to provide the dynamic forces to
modulate cellcell adhesion; p120-catenin binds to the cytoplasmic tail
of cadherin and becomes a positive regulator of cadherin function.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
24
SECTION 1
loops, a transmembrane segment and a cytoplasmic tail. The nectins
and Necls consist of four and five members, respectively. These are
present in the belt-like tight junctions and zonula adherens.
The nectinafadin complex initiates the formation of a zonula
adherens and after cellcell contacts are formed between adjacent
cells, cadherins are recruited to these contact sites. Afadin and -catenin
interact with one another and also with F-actin through adaptor
proteins.
Integrins mediate cellextracellular matrix and cellcell interactions,
and integrate extracellular signals with the cytoskeleton and cellular
signalling pathways. Because integrins can be activated by proteins
binding to their extracellular or their intracellular domains, they can
function in a bidirectional fashion by transmitting information
outside-in (cues from the extracellular environment) and inside-out
(cues from the intracellular environment) of the cell. The integrin
family of proteins consists of  subunits and  subunits forming transmembrane
heterodimers. The amino-acid sequence arginineglycine
aspartic acid, or RGD motif, on target ligands (such as fibronectin,
laminin and other extracellular matrix proteins) has binding affinity
to the extracellular binding head of integrins. For further reading on
integrins and their ligands properties, see Barczyk et al (2010).
The actin-binding protein talin binds the cytoplasmic domain of
integrin  subunit and activates integrins. Vinculin interacts with talin
and -actinin cross-links two filaments of actin. Kindlins, named after
the gene mutated in Kindlers syndrome, a skin blistering disease, interact
with talin to activate integrins.
extravasation across the endothelium. For additional reading on the
significance and mechanism of homing, see Girard et al (2012).
Three major types of selectin include L-selectin (for lymphocytes),
E-selectin (for endothelial cells) and P-selectin (for platelets).
Calcium-independent cell adhesion molecules:
Ig-CAMs, nectins and integrins
Ig-CAMs are cell-surface glycoproteins with an extracellular domain
characterized by a variable number of immunoglobulin-like loops.
Most Ig-CAMs have a transmembrane domain; others are attached to
the cell surface by a glycophosphatidyl inositol (GPI) anchor. As in
cadherins, Ig-CAMs establish homophilic interactions contributing to
cellcell adhesion, although in a Ca2+-independent manner. The cytoplasmic
tail of Ig-CAMs also interacts with cytoskeletal components
such as F-actin, ankyrins and spectrin. Ig-CAMs can directly or indirectly
bind growth factor receptors and control their internalization.
Different types are expressed in different tissues. Neural cell adhesion
molecules (N-CAMs) are found on a number of cell types but are
expressed widely by neural cells. Intercellular adhesion molecules
(ICAMs) are expressed on vascular endothelial cells. Cell adhesion
molecule binding is predominantly homophilic, although some use a
heterophilic mechanism, e.g. vascular intercellular adhesion molecule
(VCAM), which can bind to integrins.
Nectins and nectin-like molecules (Necls) are members of the
Ig-CAM superfamily (see Takai et al (2008) for further reading on
nectins and Necls). They have an extracellular domain with three Ig-like
Fig. 1.19 Intercellular junctions: the apical junctional complex and other junctional specializations, illustrating the protein components of each junction
and of the basal lamina. An anastomotic network of contacts between adjacent cell membranes forms a tight occluding junction. Basal plasma
membrane is attached to a basal lamina at a hemidesmosome. In a gap junction, numerous channels (pores within connexons) are clustered to form a
plaque-like junctional region between adjacent plasma membranes. (A and C are transmission electron micrographs; B and D are freeze-fractured
preparations.) A, An apical junctional complex. B, A tight junction. C, A hemidesmosome. D, A gap junction. (B, Courtesy of Dr Andrew Kent, Kings
College London. D, Courtesy of Professor Dieter Hlser, University of Stuttgart. A,C, From human tissue, courtesy of Dr Bart Wagner, Histopathology
Department, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK. Diagram modified from Kierszenbaum AL, Tres LL. 2012. Histology and Cell Biology: An Introduction to
Pathology. 3rd ed, Philadelphia: Elsevier, Saunders; 2011.)
S S
S S Fibronectin
Type IV collagen
Collagens
Claudin
Occludin
ZO-1, ZO-2 and ZO-3
Afadinnectin complex
Plakoglobin, plakophilin
and desmoplakin
Afadinnectin complex
Cadherins
Cadherins
Integrin
Integrin
Laminin
Selectins
Ig-CAMs
Catenin complex
Actin
Talin Actin
Vinculin
Intermediate
filaments
Intermediate filaments
Nidogen (entactin)
Perlecan
Tight (occluding) junction
Tight
(occluding)
junction
Zonula adherens Tight (occluding) junction
Macula adherens
Hemidesmosome
Gap
junction
Zonula
adherens
Macula
adherens
APICAL DOMAIN
BASAL LAMINA BASOLATERAL DOMAIN
APICAL JUNCTIONAL COMPLEX
A
C D
B
Hemidesmosome Gap junctionBasic structure and function of cells
24.e1
CHAPTER 1
Homing, a process that also enables thymus-derived T cells (see
Ch. 4) to home in on lymph nodes, consists of two phases. In the first,
selectin phase, carbohydrate ligands on the surface of leukocytes adhere
loosely to selectins present on the surface of endothelial cells. During
the second, cooperative sequential integrin phase, strong adhesion
permits the transendothelial migration of leukocytes into the extravascular
space in cooperation with cell adhesion molecules of the Ig-CAM
superfamily.
Nectins can interact homophilically or heterophilically with other
nectins to mediate, primarily, adhesion. The intracellular domain of
nectins binds to the cytoplasmic adaptor protein afadin, which links to
actin, whereas Necls interact with scaffolding proteins but not to afadin.
Necls are involved in a large variety of cellular functions, including
axonglial interaction, Schwann cell differentiation and myelination.
In humans there are about 18 -subunit subtypes and 8 -subunit
subtypes, which produce 24 integrin heterodimers. The subunits are
associated by non-covalent interactions and consist of an extracellular
ligand-binding head, two multidomain segments, two single-pass transmembrane
segments and two cytoplasmic tails. Upon binding of extracellular
ligands, integrins undergo a conformational change (integrin
activation), which allows the recruitment of several cytoplasmic F-actin
activator proteins (such as talin, vinculin, -actinin and kindlins) to
their short cytoplasmic domain. This results in the formation of a
protein complex that interacts with the actin cytoskeleton.
In addition, the protein complex promotes the recruitment and
activation of several protein kinases (such as focal adhesion kinase),
leading to the activation of signalling pathways essential for several
cellular activities such as cell migration, proliferation, survival and gene
expression.Ageing, cellular senescence, cancer and apoptosis
25
CHAPTER 1
smooth muscle cells, in the intercalated discs of cardiac muscle cells
and between glial cells and neurones. The junctions involve cadherins
attached indirectly to actin filaments on the inner side of the
membrane.
Desmosomes (maculae adherentes)
Desmosomes are limited, plaque-like areas of particularly strong intercellular
contact. In epithelial cells, they may be located subjacent to the
tight junction and zonula adherens belts, forming collectively the epithelial
apical junctional complex (see Fig. 1.19A). The intercellular gap
is approximately 25 nm; it is filled with electron-dense filamentous
material (the intercellular cadherins) running transversely across it and
is also marked by a series of densely staining bands (the cytoplasmic
dense plaques) running parallel to the cell surfaces. Adhesion is mediated
by Ca2+-dependent cadherins, desmogleins and desmocollins.
Within the cells on either side, each cytoplasmic dense plaque underlies
the plasma membrane and consists of the proteins plakophilin, desmoplakin
and plakoglobin (-catenin), into which the ends of intermediate
filaments are inserted. The type of intermediate filament depends
on the cell type, e.g. keratins are found in epithelia and desmin filaments
are found in cardiac muscle cells. Desmosomes form strong
anchorage points, likened to spot-welds, between cells subject to
mechanical stress, e.g. in the prickle cell layer of the epidermis, where
they are extremely numerous and large.
Hemidesmosomes
Hemidesmosomes are asymmetric anchoring junctions found between
the basal side of epithelial cells and the associated basal lamina.
The latter is a component of the basement membrane and contains
laminin, an integrin ligand. The other component of the basement
membrane is the reticular lamina, a collagen-containing layer produced
by fibroblasts that also contains fibronectin, another integrin ligand.
Hemidesmosomes resemble a single-sided desmosome, anchored on
one side to the plasma membrane, and on the other to the basal lamina
and adjacent collagen fibrils (Fig. 1.19C). The plaque has distinct proteins
not seen in the plaques of a zonula adherens or a macula adherens:
BPAG1 (bullous pemphigoid antigen 1), a member of the plakin
family, and BPAG2 (bullous pemphigoid antigen 2), which possesses
an extracellular collagenous domain. BPAG1 and BPAG2 were initially
detected in patients with bullous pemphigoid, an autoimmune blistering
disease. On the cytoplasmic side of the dense plaque there is a less
dense plate into which keratin filaments are inserted, where they interact
with the protein plectin associated with integrin 64. Hemidesmosomes
use integrins and anchoring filaments (laminin 5) as their
adhesion molecules anchored to the basal lamina, whereas desmosomes
use cadherins.
Focal adhesion plaques
Less highly structured attachments with a similar arrangement exist
between many other cell types and their surrounding matrices, e.g.
between smooth muscle cells and their matrix fibrils, and between the
ends of skeletal muscle cells and tendon fibres. The smaller, punctate
adhesions resemble focal adhesion plaques, which are regions of local
attachment between cells and the extracellular matrix. They are typically
situated at or near the ends of actin filament bundles (stress fibres),
anchored through intermediary proteins to the cytoplasmic domains of
integrins. In turn, these are attached at their external ends to collagen
or other filamentous structures in the extracellular matrix. They are
usually short-lived; their formation and subsequent disruption are part
of the motile behaviour of migratory cells. See Geiger et al (2009) for
further reading on focal adhesions.
Gap junctions (communicating junctions)
Gap junctions resemble tight junctions in transverse section, but the
two apposed lipid bilayers are separated by an apparent gap of 3 nm,
which is bridged by a cluster of transmembrane channels (connexons).
Each connexon is formed by a ring of six connexin proteins whose
external surfaces meet those of the adjacent cell in the middle. A minute
central pore links one cell to the next (Fig. 1.19D). Larger assemblies
of many thousands of channels are often packed in hexagonal arrays.
Gap junctions occur between numerous cells, including hepatocytes
and cardiac myocytes.
AGEING, CELLULAR SENESCENCE, CANCER
AND APOPTOSIS
Ageing is a universal feature of biological organisms, defined by a
gradual decline over time in cell and tissue function that often, but not
Genetic mutations in integrins or integrin regulators have been associated
with Glanzmanns thrombasthenia (caused by mutations in
integrin 3 subunit), the immunodeficiency disorder leukocyte adhesion
deficiency types I and III (determined by mutations in integrin 2
subunit and kindlin 3, respectively) and skin diseases (caused by mutations
in kindlin 1 and integrin 2, 6 and 3 subunits). Integrins are
essential in the homing process, following the selectin phase, and are
also involved in tumour progression and metastasis.
Specialized intercellular junctions
Specialized cellcell junctions are the hallmark of all epithelial tissues.
There are two major categories: symmetric junctions and asymmetric
junctions. Symmetric junctions may be subdivided into three types:
tight junctions (also known as occluding junctions or zonulae occludentes);
anchoring junctions (including zonulae adherentes, or belt
desmosomes, and maculae adherentes, or spot desmosomes); and communication
junctions, represented by gap junctions. Tight junctions and
anchoring junctions are components of the epithelial apical junctional
complex. Hemidesmosomes are asymmetric junctions (see Fig. 1.19).
Tight junctions (occluding junctions,
zonulae occludentes)
Tight junctions are the most apical component of the epithelial apical
junctional complex. The main functions of tight junctions are the regulation
of the paracellular permeability of the epithelial layer and the
formation of an apicalbasolateral intramembrane diffusion barrier,
the hallmark of epithelial cell polarity. Tight junctions form a continuous
belt (zonula) around the cell perimeter, near the apical domain of
epithelial cells, and are connected to the actin cytoskeleton. At the site
of the tight junction, the plasma membranes of adjacent cells come into
close contact, so that the space between them is obliterated. Freezefracture
electron microscopy shows that the contact between these
membranes is represented by branching and anastomosing sealing
strands of protein particles on the P (protoplasmic) face of the lipid
bilayer (Fig. 1.19A,B). A tight junction contains numerous proteins:
occludins and claudins, members of the tetraspanin family of proteins,
containing four transmembrane domains, two loops and two cytoplasmic
tails  occludins and tetraspanins provide the molecular basis for
the formation of the branching and anastomosing strands seen in
freeze-fracture preparations; the afadinnectin complex and junctional
adhesion molecules (JAMs), each forming cis-homodimers and interacting
with each other through their extracellular domains (forming transhomodimers)
 nectins and JAMs are members of the immunoglobulin
superfamily, and the afadin component of the afadinnectin complex
interacts with F-actin; and cytosolic zonula occludens proteins 1, 2 and
3 (ZO-1, ZO-2 and ZO-3). ZO-1 protein is associated with afadin and
the intracellular domain of JAMs. All three ZO proteins facilitate the
reciprocal interaction of occludins, claudins and JAMs with F-actin.
Defects in paracellular magnesium permeability and reabsorption in
kidneys occur when there is a mutation in claudin 16 and claudin 19
(renal magnesium wasting). For further reading on claudins, see
Escudero-Esparza et al (2011). For further reading on JAMs, see Bazzoni
(2003).
Anchoring junctions
In contrast to tight junctions, zonulae adherentes and maculae adherentes
are characterized by the presence, along the cytosolic sides of the
plasma membranes of adjacent epithelial cells, of symmetric dense
plaques connected to each other across the intercellular space by cadherins.
They differ in that F-actin is associated with plaques in zonulae
adherentes and intermediate filaments are linked to plaques in maculae
adherentes.
Zonula adherens (belt desmosome)
A zonula adherens is a continuous belt-like zone of adhesion parallel
and just basal to a tight junction and also encircling the apical perimeter
of epithelial cells. Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion molecules (members
of the desmoglein and desmocollin families of cadherins) are key components
of a zonula adherens. In addition to the cadherincatenin
complex, a zonula adherens also houses the afadinnectin complex.
A specific component of a zonula adherens is a cytoplasmic dense
plaque attached to the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane. It consists
of desmoplakin, plakophilin and plakoglobin proteins (the latter
is also known as -catenin). A similar plaque is seen in a macula adherens
or spot desmosome (see below).
Fascia adherens
A fascia adherens is similar to a zonula adherens, but is more
limited in extent and forms a strip or patch of adhesion, e.g. betweenBasic structure and function of cells
25.e1
CHAPTER 1
Essentially, two molecules, cadherins and afadin, link to the actin
cytoskeleton. In cultured cells, nectins appear to initiate the formation
of a zonula adherens before the involvement of cadherins.Basic str uct ure and function of ce lls
26
SECTION 1
enter the cell. The intrinsic mitochondrial route involves the release of
cytochrome c from the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial
membranes into the cytosol. Extrinsic and intrinsic pathways
work cooperatively in the subsequent activation of a family of initiatoreffector
proteases, known as caspases (cysteine aspartic acid-specific
proteases), which are present in healthy cells as inactive precursor
enzymes or zymogens. Activation of caspases 3, 6 and 7 mediates apoptosis
by initiating a cascade of degradative processes that target major
constituents of the cell cytoskeleton, producing membrane blebbing, a
distinctive feature of apoptosis caused by cytosolic and nuclear fragments
flowing into the developing apoptotic bodies. Caspase cleavage
inactivates many systems that normally promote damage repair and
support cell viability, and activates a number of proteins that promote
the death and disassembly of the cell. For further reading on apoptosis,
see Taylor et al (2008).
always, decreases the longevity of an individual. The hallmarks of
ageing are reviewed in Lpez-Otn et al (2013).
Cellular senescence is defined by an irreversible arrest in cell proliferation
when cells experience DNA damage at telomeres and a decrease
in mitogenic signalling. In contrast to reversibly arrested quiescent cells
in G0 of the cell cycle, senescent growth arrest is irreversible; cells in this
state cannot be stimulated to proliferate by known stimuli and cannot
be prompted to re-enter the cell cycle by physiological mechanisms. For
further reading on senescence and the cell cycle, see Chandler and Peters
(2013). Senescent cells can cause or foster degenerative diseases. In old
age, cellular senescence in humans determines typical pathologies, including
atherosclerosis leading to stroke, osteoporosis, macular degeneration,
cardiopulmonary and renal failure, and neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimers and Parkinsons disease.
Senescent cells undergo changes in gene expression, which result in
the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, growth factors and proteases,
activities that collectively define a senescence-associated secretory
phenotype capable of triggering angiogenesis, inflammatory
responses, stem cell renewal and differentiation, and which may also
determine resistance to cancer chemotherapy. Senescent cells can be
identified histochemically by their expression of either senescenceassociated
-galactosidase, a lysosomal marker which is overexpressed
in these cells, or the tumour suppressor protein p16INK4a, which promotes
the formation of senescence-associated chromatin. For further
reading on ageing, cellular senescence and cancer, see Campisi (2013).
Cellular senescence can be caused by a disruption of metabolic
signalling pathways, derived from mitogens and proliferation factors,
and the activation of tumour suppressors, combined with telomere
shortening and genomic damage. See Sahin and DePinho (2012) for
further reading.
Cellular senescence suppresses tumorigenesis because cell proliferation
is required for cancer development. However, senescent cells can
stimulate the proliferation and malignant progression of adjacent premalignant
cells by the release of senescence-inducing oncogenic stimuli.
Cancer cells must harbour mutations to prevent telomere-dependent
and oncogene-induced senescence, such as in the p53 and p16-
retinoblastoma protein pathways. See Lpez-Otn et al (2013) for
further reading on the pathogenesis of ageing.
Apoptosis
Cells die as a result of either tissue injury (necrosis) or the internal
activation of a suicide programme (apoptosis) in response to extrinsic
or intrinsic cues. Apoptosis (programmed cell death) is defined by the
controlled demolition of cellular constituents and the ultimate uptake
of apoptotic cell fragments by other cells to prevent immune responses.
Some senescent cells become resistant to cell-death signalling, i.e. they
are apoptosis-resistant. In effect, senescence blocks growth of damaged
or stressed cells, whereas apoptosis quickly disposes of them. Apoptosis
is a central mechanism controlling multicellular development. During
morphogenesis, apoptosis mediates activities such as the separation of
the developing digits, and plays an important role in regulating the
number of neurones in the nervous system (the majority of neurones
die during development). Apoptosis also ensures that inappropriate
or inefficient T cells are eliminated in the thymus during clonal
selection.
The morphological changes exhibited by necrotic cells are very different
from those seen in apoptotic cells. Necrotic cells swell and subsequently
rupture, and the resulting debris may induce an inflammatory
response. Apoptotic cells shrink, their nuclei and chromosomes fragment,
forming apoptotic bodies, and their plasma membranes undergo
conformational changes that act as a signal to local phagocytes. The
dead cells are removed rapidly, and as their intracellular contents are
not released into the extracellular environment, inflammatory reactions
are avoided; the apoptotic fragments also stimulate macrophages to
release anti-inflammatory cytokines.
Apoptosis and cell proliferation are intimately coupled; several cell
cycle regulators can influence both cell division and apoptosis. The
signals that trigger apoptosis include withdrawal of survival factors or
exposure to inappropriate proliferative stimuli. Three main routes to
the induction of apoptosis have been established (Fig. 1.20). Two, the
Fas ligand (FasL) pathway and the granzyme B pathway, are extrinsic,
whereas the mitochondrial route is intrinsic. The Fas ligand (FasL)
pathway involves binding of FasL to death receptors on the plasma
membrane and recruitment of adaptor proteins, such as the Fas-associated
death domain proteins, followed by the recruitment and activation
of caspase 8. The granzyme B pathway involves creation of a perforin
plasma membrane channel enabling the caspase-like granzyme B to
Fig. 1.20 Caspase activation pathways during apoptosis. A, The
granzyme B extrinsic pathway activates caspase 8 and caspase 3
following entry of granzyme B across the plasma membrane pore-forming
protein, perforin. This pathway is observed in cytotoxic T cells or natural
killer cells for delivery of the protease granzyme B to target cells. B, The
Fas ligand (FasL) extrinsic pathway is initiated by binding of FasL to
clustered transmembrane death receptors that recruit adaptor proteins,
such as the Fas-associated death-domain protein (FADD) to their
intracellular domain, which in turn recruits and aggregates caspase 8
molecules, which become activated. Activated caspase 8 activates
caspase 7 and caspase 3. C, The cytochrome c intrinsic pathway starts
when granzyme B or activated caspase 8 causes the truncation by
proteolysis of the protein BIDD (BH3-interacting domain death agonist),
which penetrates a mitochondrion through BAXBAK (BCL-2 associated
X proteinBCL-2 antagonist killer) channel proteins on the outer
mitochondrial membrane, causing the release of cytochrome c.
Cytochrome c enables the assembly of the apoptosome (consisting of
seven molecules of apoptosis protease-activating factor-1 (APAF1) and
seven molecules of caspase 9), which in turn activates caspase 3 and
caspase 7. Finally, the proteolytic activation cascade of caspase 6,
caspase 2, caspase 8 and caspase 10 executes cell deconstruction.
Fas ligand
Granzyme B
Granzyme B
Perforin
Death receptors
FADD
BIDD
Caspase 8
Caspase 3
C Cytochrome c pathway
A Granzyme B pathway B FasL pathway
Caspase 9
Apoptosome
Mitochondrion
Cytochrome c
Caspase 7
Active caspase 8
Caspase 3
Caspase 2
Caspase 10
Caspase 6
Caspase 8
BAXBAK
channels
Video 1.1 Mitosis in a cell with fluorescently-labelled chromosomes
and microtubules.
Bonus e-book videoBasic structure and function of cells
26.e1
CHAPTER 1
The ends of the chromosomes, or telomeres, become shorter and
more dysfunctional with each DNA replication round. Telomere shortening
has been shown to activate DNA damage responses, leading to
mitochondrial dysfunction (a decrease in production of ATP and an
increase in reactive oxygen species) and the activation of p53, which
induces growth arrest, apoptosis and senescence of stem cells and progenitor
cells. p53 interconnects with different longevity metabolic signalling
pathways, including the insulin, insulin-like growth factor I
(IGFI) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways, which
are known to regulate lifespan by increasing the expression of genes
involved in stress resistance and energy balance. Mutations in TERC (the
RNA component of telomerase) and TERT (the catalytic component of
telomerase) are found in patients with the premature ageing syndrome,
dyskeratosis congenita (poor growth of fingernails and toenails, skin
pigmentation and oral leukoplakia). Other important contributors to
cell senescence are dysregulated autophagy and lack of disposal of
misfolded proteins by the ubiquitin26S proteasome machinery.
These responses are collectively designated telomere-initiated cellular
senescence.27
CHAPTER 1
Key references
KEY REFERENCES
Bray D 2001 Cell Movements. New York: Garland.
A comprehensive presentation of the structural and molecular features of the
cytoskeleton, including its properties and behaviour in cell and organelle
movement in living cells.
Burke B, Stewart CL 2013 The nuclear lamins: flexibility in function. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 14:1324.
An up-to-date, detailed description of the nuclear lamina and its major
components, lamins, members of the intermediate filament protein family.
Chinnery PF, Hudson G 2013 Mitochondrial genetics. Br Med Bull 106:
13559.
A detailed survey of the involvement of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
defects in human disease, with a specific focus on the mechanisms
controlling mtDNA inheritance.
Girard JP, Moussion C, Frster R 2012 HEVs, lymphatics and homeostatic
immune cell trafficking in lymph nodes. Nat Rev Immunol 12:
76273.
A comprehensive description of the continuous trafficking of immune cells
across the vascular endothelium (homing) engaging cell adhesion molecules.
Kierszenbaum AL, Tres LL 2012 Histology and Cell Biology: An Introduction
to Pathology. Philadelphia: Elsevier, Saunders.
An integrated visual view of histology, cell biology and basic pathology
focused on structure and function, including human pathological examples
from a molecular viewpoint.
Lpez-Otn C, Blasco MA, Partridge L et al 2013 The hallmarks of aging. Cell
153:1194217.
A review of recent advances in the pathogenesis of ageing, defined by a
gradual loss of physiological integrity leading to major human pathological
conditions. Genomic instability, telomerase attrition, epigenetic alterations,
loss of proteolysis and mitochondrial dysfunction are considered.
Pollard TD, Earnshaw WC 2008 Cell Biology. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
Saunders.
A detailed and comprehensive account of structural and molecular aspects of
cell biology, including abnormalities related to human disease.
Porter RM, Lane EB 2003 Phenotypes, genotypes and their contribution to
understanding keratin function. Trends Genet 19:27885.
A correlation of human epithelial pathological conditions with mouse
mutant studies focused on keratin diversity required for cells to attune to
mechanical and biochemical signalling.
Saftig P, Klumperman J 2009 Lysosome biogenesis and lysosomal membrane
proteins: trafficking meets function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:
62335.
The participation of lysosomes in the degradation of extracellular material
internalized by endocytosis and lysosomal sorting pathways, reviewed within
the context of human diseases resulting from defective lysosomal biogenesis.
Scholey JM 2008 Intraflagellar transport motors in cilia: moving along the
cells antenna. J Cell Biol 180:239.
Ciliopathies derived from the defective assembly, maintenance and function
of the axoneme in motile and sensory cilia, considered within the framework
of intraflagellar transport proteins and associated molecular motors.Basic structure and function of cells
27.e1
CHAPTER 1
REFERENCES
Baldari CT, Rosenbaum J 2010 Intraflagellar transport: its not just for cilia
anymore. Curr Opin Cell Biol 22:7580.
Barczyk M, Carracedo S, Gullberg D 2010 Integrins. Cell Tissue Res
339:26980.
Bazzoni G 2003 The JAM family of junctional adhesion molecules. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 15:52530.
Boisvert FM, van Koningsbruggen S, Navascus J et al 2007 The multifunctional
nucleolus. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:57485.
Boya P, Reggiori F, Codogno P 2013 Emerging regulation and functions of
autophagy. Nat Cell Biol 15:71320.
Braverman NE, DAgostino MD, Maclean GE 2013 Peroxisome biogenesis
disorders: biological, clinical and pathophysiological perspectives. Dev
Disabil Res Rev 17:18796.
Bravo R, Parra V, Gatica D et al 2013 Endoplasmic reticulum and the
unfolded protein response: dynamics and metabolic integration. Int Rev
Cell Mol Biol 301:21590.
Bray D 2001 Cell Movements. New York: Garland.
A comprehensive presentation of the structural and molecular features of the
cytoskeleton, including its properties and behaviour in cell and organelle
movement in living cells.
Brieher WM, Yap AS 2013 Cadherin junctions and their cytoskeleton(s).
Curr Opin Cell Biol 25:3946.
Briscoe J, Thrond PP 2013 The mechanisms of Hedgehog signalling and its
roles in development and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14:41831.
Brown JW, McKnight CJ 2010 Molecular model of the microvillar cytoskeleton
and organization of the brush border. PLoS One 5:e9406.
Burke B, Stewart CL 2013 The nuclear lamins: flexibility in function. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 14:1324.
An up-to-date, detailed description of the nuclear lamina and its major
components, lamins, members of the intermediate filament protein family.
Campisi J 2013 Aging, cellular senescence and cancer. Annu Rev Physiol
75:685705.
Chandler H, Peters G 2013 Stressing the cell cycle in senescence and aging.
Curr Op Cell Biol Dec; 25:76571.
Chinnery PF, Hudson G 2013 Mitochondrial genetics. Br Med Bull
106:13559.
A detailed survey of the involvement of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
defects in human disease, with a specific focus on the mechanisms
controlling mtDNA inheritance.
Clarke PR, Zhang C 2008 Spatial and temporal coordination of mitosis by
Ran GTPase. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:46477.
Dominguez R 2010 Structural insights into de novo actin polymerization.
Curr Opin Struct Biol 20:21725.
Escudero-Esparza A, Jiang WG, Martin TA 2011 The Claudin family and its
role in cancer and metastasis. Front Biosci 16:106983.
Geiger B, Spatz JP, Bershadsky AD 2009 Environmental sensing through
focal adhesions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:2133.
Girard JP, Moussion C, Frster R 2012 HEVs, lymphatics and homeostatic
immune cell trafficking in lymph nodes. Nat Rev Immunol 12:76273.
A comprehensive description of the continuous trafficking of immune cells
across the vascular endothelium (homing) engaging cell adhesion molecules.
Gnczy P 2012 Towards a molecular architecture of centriole assembly. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 13:42535.
Hammer JA 3rd, Sellers JR 2012 Walking to work: roles for class V myosins
as cargo transporters. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13:1326.
Hao L, Scholey JM 2009 Intraflagellar transport at a glance. J Cell Sci
122:88992.
Herrmann H, Br H, Kreplak L et al 2007 Intermediate filaments: from cell
architecture to nanomechanics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:56273.
Jin H, Nachury MV 2009 The BBSome. Curr Biol 19:R4723.
Kierszenbaum AL, Rivkin E, Tres LL 2011 Cytoskeletal track selection during
cargo transport in spermatids is relevant to male fertility. Spermatogenesis
1:22130.
Kierszenbaum AL, Tres LL 2012 Histology and Cell Biology: An Introduction
to Pathology. Philadelphia: Elsevier, Saunders.
An integrated visual view of histology, cell biology and basic pathology
focused on structure and function, including human pathological examples
from a molecular viewpoint.
Lpez-Otn C, Blasco MA, Partridge L et al 2013 The hallmarks of aging. Cell
153:1194217.
A review of recent advances in the pathogenesis of ageing, defined by a
gradual loss of physiological integrity leading to major human pathological
conditions. Genomic instability, telomerase attrition, epigenetic alterations,
loss of proteolysis and mitochondrial dysfunction are considered.
Luger K, Dechassa ML, Tremethick DJ 2012 New insights into nucleosome
and chromatin structure: an ordered state or a disordered affair? Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 13:43647.
Mostowy S, Cossart P 2012 Septins: the fourth component of the cytoskeleton.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13:18394.
Muller PA, Vousden KH 2013 p53 mutations in cancer. Nat Cell Biol
15:28.
Munro S 2011 The golgin coiled-coil proteins of the Golgi apparatus. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3:a005256.
Nandakumar J, Cech TR 2013 Finding the end: recruitment of telomerase
to telomeres. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14:6982.
Pan X, Hobbs RP, Coulombe PA 2012 The expanding significance of keratin
intermediate filaments in normal and diseased epithelia. Curr Op Cell
Biol 25:110.
Park C, Cuervo AM 2013 Selective autophagy: talking with the UPS. Cell
Biochem Biophys 67:313.
Pollard TD, Earnshaw WC 2008 Cell Biology. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
Saunders.
A detailed and comprehensive account of structural and molecular aspects of
cell biology, including abnormalities related to human disease.
Porter RM, Lane EB 2003 Phenotypes, genotypes and their contribution to
understanding keratin function. Trends Genet 19:27885.
A correlation of human epithelial pathological conditions with mouse
mutant studies focused on keratin diversity required for cells to attune to
mechanical and biochemical signalling.
Raices M, DAngelo MA 2012 Nuclear pore complex composition: a new
regulator of tissue-specific and developmental functions. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol 13:68799.
Rotty JD, Wu C, Bear JE 2013 New insights into the regulation and cellular
functions of the ARP2/3 complex. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14:712.
Saftig P, Klumperman J 2009 Lysosome biogenesis and lysosomal membrane
proteins: trafficking meets function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
10:62335.
The participation of lysosomes in the degradation of extracellular material
internalized by endocytosis and lysosomal sorting pathways, reviewed within
the context of human diseases resulting from defective lysosomal biogenesis.
Sahin E, DePinho RA 2012 Axis of ageing: telomeres, p53 and mitochondria.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13:397404.
Scholey JM 2008 Intraflagellar transport motors in cilia: moving along the
cells antenna. J Cell Biol 180:239.
Ciliopathies derived from the defective assembly, maintenance and function
of the axoneme in motile and sensory cilia, considered within the framework
of intraflagellar transport proteins and associated molecular motors.
Settembre C, Fraldi A, Medina DL et al 2013 Signals from the lysosome:
a control centre for cellular clearance and energy metabolism. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 14:28396.
Simon DN, Wilson KL 2011 The nucleoskeleton as a genome-associated
dynamic network of networks. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12:695708.
Smith CE, Ordovs JM 2012 Update on perilipin polymorphisms and
obesity. Nutr Rev 70:61121.
Spang A 2013 Traffic COPs: rules of detection. The EMBO J 32:91516.
Takai Y, Miyoshi J, Ikeda W et al 2008 Nectins and nectin-like molecules:
roles in contact inhibition of cell movement and proliferation. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 9:60315.
Taylor RC, Cullen SP, Martin SJ 2008 Apoptosis: controlled demolition at
the cellular level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:23141.
Theodoulou FL, Bernhardt K, Linka N et al 2013 Peroxisome membrane
proteins: multiple trafficking routes and multiple functions? Biochem J
451:34552.
Tomko RJ Jr, Hochstrasser M 2013 Molecular architecture and assembly of
the eukaryotic proteasome. Annu Rev Biochem 82:41545.
Tres LL 2005 XY chromosomal bivalent: nucleolar attraction. Mol Reprod
Dev 72:16.
Weinbaum S, Tarbell JM, Damiano ER 2007 The structure and function of
the endothelial cell glycocalyx layer. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 9:12167.
Worman HJ 2012 Nuclear lamins and laminopathies. J Pathol 226:31625.28
SECTION 1
CHAPTER 2 Integrating cells into tissues
basal lamina, which is synthesized predominantly by the epithelial
cells. The basal lamina is described on page 34.
Epithelia can usually regenerate when injured. Indeed, many epithelia
continuously replace their cells to offset cell loss caused by mechanical
abrasion (reviewed in Blanpain et al (2007)). Blood vessels do not
penetrate typical epithelia and so cells receive their nutrition by diffusion
from capillaries of neighbouring connective tissues. This arrangement
limits the maximum thickness of living epithelial cell layers.
Epithelia, together with their supporting connective tissue, can often be
removed surgically as one layer, which is collectively known as a membrane.
Where the surface of a membrane is moistened by mucous
glands it is called a mucous membrane or mucosa, whereas a similar
layer of connective tissue covered by mesothelium is called a serous
membrane or serosa.
CLASSIFICATION
Epithelia can be classified as unilaminar (single-layered, simple), in
which a single layer of cells rests on a basal lamina; or multilaminar,
in which the layer is more than one cell thick. The latter includes:
stratified squamous epithelia, in which flattened superficial cells are
constantly replaced from the basal layers; urothelium (transitional epithelium),
which serves special functions in the urinary tract; and other
multilaminar epithelia such as those lining the largest ducts of some
exocrine glands, which, like urothelium, are replaced only very slowly
under normal conditions. Seminiferous epithelium is a specialized
multilaminar tissue found only in the testis.
Unilaminar (simple) epithelia
Unilaminar epithelia are further classified according to the shape of
their cells, into squamous, cuboidal, columnar and pseudostratified
types. Cell shape may, in some cases, be related to cell volume. Where
little cytoplasm is present, there are generally few organelles and therefore
there is low metabolic activity and cells are squamous or low
cuboidal. Highly active cells, e.g. secretory epithelia, contain abundant
mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, and are typically tall cuboidal
or columnar. Unilaminar epithelia can also be subdivided into
those that have special functions, such as those with cilia, numerous
microvilli, secretory vacuoles (in mucous and serous glandular cells) or
sensory features. Myoepithelial cells, which are contractile, are found as
isolated cells associated with glandular structures, e.g. salivary and
mammary glands.
Squamous epithelium
Simple squamous epithelium is composed of flattened, tightly apposed,
polygonal cells (squames). This type of epithelium is described as tessellated
when the cells have complex, interlocking borders rather than
straight boundaries. The cytoplasm may in places be only 0.1 m thick
and the nucleus usually bulges into the overlying space (Fig. 2.2A).
These cells line the alveoli of the lungs, where their surface area is huge
and cytoplasmic volume correspondingly large, and they also form the
outer capsular wall of renal corpuscles, the thin segments of the renal
tubules and various parts of the inner ear. Because it is so thin, simple
squamous epithelium allows rapid diffusion of gases and water across
its surface; it may also engage in active transport, as indicated by the
presence of numerous endocytic vesicles in these cells. Tight junctions
(occluding junctions, zonulae adherentes) between adjacent cells
ensure that materials pass primarily through cells, rather than between
them.
Cuboidal and columnar epithelia
Cuboidal and columnar epithelia consist of regular rows of cylindrical
cells (Figs 2.2B, C). Cuboidal cells are approximately square in vertical
section, whereas columnar cells are taller than their diameter, and both
Cells evolved as single, free-living organisms, but natural selection
favoured more complex communities of cells, multicellular organisms,
where groups of cells specialize during development to carry out specific
functions for the body as a whole. This allowed the emergence of larger
organisms with greater control over their internal environment and the
evolution of highly specialized organic structures such as the brain.
The human body contains more than 200 different cell types, sharing
the same genome but with different patterns of gene expression.
Some cells in the body are essentially migratory, but most exist as
cellular aggregates in which individual cells carry out similar or closely
related functions in a coordinated manner. These aggregates are termed
tissues, and can be classified into a fairly small number of broad categories
on the basis of their structure, function and molecular properties.
On the basis of their structure, most tissues are divided into four major
types: epithelia, connective or supporting tissue, muscle and nervous
tissue. Epithelia are continuous layers of cells with little intercellular
space, which cover or line surfaces, or have been so derived. In connective
tissues, the cells are embedded in an extracellular matrix, which,
typically, forms a substantial and important component of the tissue.
Muscle consists largely of specialized contractile cells. Nervous tissue
consists of cells specialized for conducting and transmitting electrical
and chemical signals and the cells that support this activity.
There is molecular evidence that this structure-based scheme of classification
has validity. Thus the intermediate filament proteins characteristic
of all epithelia are keratins (Pan et al 2012); those of connective
tissue are vimentins; those of muscle are desmins; and those of nervous
tissue are neurofilament and glial fibrillary acidic proteins. However,
cells such as myofibroblasts, neuroepithelial sensory receptors and
ependymal cells of the central nervous system have features of more
than one tissue type. Despite its anomalies, the scheme is useful for
descriptive purposes; it is widely used and will be adopted here.
In this chapter, two of the major tissue categories, epithelia and
general connective and supporting tissues, will be described. Specialized
skeletal connective tissues, i.e. cartilage and bone, together with
skeletal muscle, are described in detail in Chapter 5 as part of the musculoskeletal
system overview. Smooth muscle and cardiac muscle are
described in Chapter 6. Nervous system tissues are described in Chapter
3. Specialized defensive cells, which also form a migrant population
within the general connective tissues, are considered in more detail in
Chapter 4, with blood, lymphoid tissues and haemopoiesis.
EPITHELIA
The term epithelium is applied to the layer or layers of cells that cover
the body surfaces or line the body cavities that open on to it. The fate
of embryonic epithelial populations is illustrated in Figure 12.3. Epithelia
function generally as selective barriers that facilitate, or inhibit,
the passage of substances across the surfaces they cover. In addition,
they may: protect underlying tissues against dehydration, chemical or
mechanical damage; synthesize and secrete products into the spaces
that they line; and function as sensory surfaces. In this respect, many
features of nervous tissue can be regarded as those of a modified
epithelium and the two tissue types share an origin in embryonic
ectoderm.
Epithelia (Fig. 2.1) are predominantly cellular and the little extracellular
material they possess is limited to the basal lamina. Intercellular
junctions, which are usually numerous, maintain the mechanical cohesiveness
of the epithelial sheet and contribute to its barrier functions.
A series of three intercellular junctions forms a typical epithelial junctional
complex: in sequence from the apical surface, this consists of a
tight junctional zone, an adherent (intermediate) junctional zone and
a region of discrete desmosome junctions. Epithelial cell shape is most
usually polygonal and partly determined by cytoplasmic features such
as secretory granules. The basal surface of an epithelium lies in contact
with a thin layer of filamentous protein and proteoglycan termed theEpithelia
29
CHAPTER 2
Sensory epithelia
Sensory epithelia are found in special sense organs of the olfactory,
gustatory and vestibulocochlear receptor systems. All of these contain
sensory cells surrounded by supportive non-receptor cells. Olfactory
receptors are modified neurones and their axons pass directly to the
brain, but the other types are specialized epithelial cells that synapse
with terminals of afferent (and sometimes efferent) nerve fibres.
Myoepithelial cells
Myoepithelial cells, which are also sometimes termed basket cells, are
fusiform or stellate in shape (Fig. 2.3), contain actin and myosin filaments,
and contract when stimulated by nervous or endocrine signals.
They surround the secretory portions and ducts of some glands, e.g.
mammary, lacrimal, salivary and sweat glands, and lie between the
basal lamina and the glandular or ductal epithelium. Their contraction
assists the initial flow of secretion into larger conduits. Myoepithelial
cells are ultrastructurally similar to smooth muscle cells in the arrangement
of their actin and myosin, but differ from them because they
originate, like the glandular cells, from embryonic ectoderm or endoderm.
They can be identified immunohistochemically on the basis of
the co-localization of myofilament proteins (which signify their contractile
function (Fig. 2.4)) a