



SALLY ROONEY
Normal People
It is one of the secrets in that change of mental poise which has been fitly named
conversion, that to many among us neither heaven nor earth has any revelation till some
personality touches theirs with a peculiar influence, subduing them into receptiveness.
George Eliot, Daniel Deronda
Contents
Title Page
Epigraph
January 2011
Three Weeks Later (February 2011)
One Month Later (March 2011)
Six Weeks Later (April 2011)
Two Days Later (April 2011)
Four Months Later (August 2011)
Three Months Later (November 2011)
Three Months Later (February 2012)
Two Months Later (April 2012)
Three Months Later (July 2012)
Six Weeks Later (September 2012)
Four Months Later (January 2013)
Six Months Later (July 2013)
Five Months Later (December 2013)
Three Months Later (March 2014)
Four Months Later (July 2014)
Five Minutes Later (July 2014)
Seven Months Later (February 2015)
Acknowledgements
About the Author
Also by the Author
Copyright
January 2011
Marianne answers the door when Connell rings the bell. Shes still wearing
her school uniform, but shes taken off the sweater, so its just the blouse
and skirt, and she has no shoes on, only tights.
Oh, hey, he says.
Come on in.
She turns and walks down the hall. He follows her, closing the door
behind him. Down a few steps in the kitchen, his mother Lorraine is
peeling off a pair of rubber gloves. Marianne hops onto the countertop and
picks up an open jar of chocolate spread, in which she has left a teaspoon.
Marianne was telling me you got your mock results today, Lorraine
says.
We got English back, he says. They come back separately. Do you want
to head on?
Lorraine folds the rubber gloves up neatly and replaces them below the
sink. Then she starts unclipping her hair. To Connell this seems like
something she could accomplish in the car.
And I hear you did very well, she says.
He was top of the class, says Marianne.
Right, Connell says. Marianne did pretty good too. Can we go?
Lorraine pauses in the untying of her apron.
I didnt realise we were in a rush, she says.
He puts his hands in his pockets and suppresses an irritable sigh, but
suppresses it with an audible intake of breath, so that it still sounds like a
sigh.
I just have to pop up and take a load out of the dryer, says Lorraine. And
then well be off. Okay?
He says nothing, merely hanging his head while Lorraine leaves the
room.
Do you want some of this? Marianne says.
Shes holding out the jar of chocolate spread. He presses his hands
down slightly further into his pockets, as if trying to store his entire body in
his pockets all at once.
No, thanks, he says.
Did you get your French results today?
Yesterday.
He puts his back against the fridge and watches her lick the spoon. In
school he and Marianne affect not to know each other. People know that
Marianne lives in the white mansion with the driveway and that Connells
mother is a cleaner, but no one knows of the special relationship between
these facts.
I got an A1, he says. What did you get in German?
An A1, she says. Are you bragging?
Youre going to get six hundred, are you?
She shrugs. You probably will, she says.
Well, youre smarter than me.
Dont feel bad. Im smarter than everyone.
Marianne is grinning now. She exercises an open contempt for people in
school. She has no friends and spends her lunchtimes alone reading novels.
A lot of people really hate her. Her father died when she was thirteen and
Connell has heard she has a mental illness now or something. Its true she
is the smartest person in school. He dreads being left alone with her like
this, but he also finds himself fantasising about things he could say to
impress her.
Youre not top of the class in English, he points out.
She licks her teeth, unconcerned.
Maybe you should give me grinds, Connell, she says.
He feels his ears get hot. Shes probably just being glib and not
suggestive, but if she is being suggestive its only to degrade him by
association, since she is considered an object of disgust. She wears ugly
thick-soled flat shoes and doesnt put make-up on her face. People have
said she doesnt shave her legs or anything. Connell once heard that she
spilled chocolate ice cream on herself in the school lunchroom, and she
went to the girls bathrooms and took her blouse off to wash it in the sink.
Thats a popular story about her, everyone has heard it. If she wanted, she
could make a big show of saying hello to Connell in school. See you this
afternoon, she could say, in front of everyone. Undoubtedly it would put
him in an awkward position, which is the kind of thing she usually seems to
enjoy. But she has never done it.
What were you talking to Miss Neary about today? says Marianne.
Oh. Nothing. I dont know. Exams.
Marianne twists the spoon around inside the jar.
Does she fancy you or something? Marianne says.
Connell watches her moving the spoon. His ears still feel very hot.
Why do you say that? he says.
God, youre not having an affair with her, are you?
Obviously not. Do you think its funny joking about that?
Sorry, says Marianne.
She has a focused expression, like shes looking through his eyes into
the back of his head.
Youre right, its not funny, she says. Im sorry.
He nods, looks around the room for a bit, digs the toe of his shoe into a
groove between the tiles.
Sometimes I feel like she does act kind of weird around me, he says.
But I wouldnt say that to people or anything.
Even in class I think shes very flirtatious towards you.
Do you really think that?
Marianne nods. He rubs at his neck. Miss Neary teaches Economics. His
supposed feelings for her are widely discussed in school. Some people are
even saying that he tried to add her on Facebook, which he didnt and
would never do. Actually he doesnt do or say anything to her, he just sits
there quietly while she does and says things to him. She keeps him back
after class sometimes to talk about his life direction, and once she actually
touched the knot of his school tie. He cant tell people about the way she
acts because theyll think hes trying to brag about it. In class he feels too
embarrassed and annoyed to concentrate on the lesson, he just sits there
staring at the textbook until the bar graphs start to blur.
People are always going on at me that I fancy her or whatever, he says.
But I actually dont, at all. I mean, you dont think Im playing into it when
she acts like that, do you?
Not that Ive seen.
He wipes his palms down on his school shirt unthinkingly. Everyone is
so convinced of his attraction to Miss Neary that sometimes he starts to
doubt his own instincts about it. What if, at some level above or below his
own perception, he does actually desire her? He doesnt even really know
what desire is supposed to feel like. Any time he has had sex in real life, he
has found it so stressful as to be largely unpleasant, leading him to suspect
that theres something wrong with him, that hes unable to be intimate with
women, that hes somehow developmentally impaired. He lies there
afterwards and thinks: I hated that so much that I feel sick. Is that just the
way he is? Is the nausea he feels when Miss Neary leans over his desk
actually his way of experiencing a sexual thrill? How would he know?
I could go to Mr Lyons for you if you want, says Marianne. I wont say
you told me anything, Ill just say I noticed it myself.
Jesus, no. Definitely not. Dont say anything about it to anyone, okay?
Okay, alright.
He looks at her to confirm shes being serious, and then nods.
Its not your fault she acts like that with you, says Marianne. Youre not
doing anything wrong.
Quietly he says: Why does everyone else think I fancy her, then?
Maybe because you blush a lot when she talks to you. But you know,
you blush at everything, you just have that complexion.
He gives a short, unhappy laugh. Thanks, he says.
Well, you do.
Yeah, Im aware.
Youre blushing now actually, says Marianne.
He closes his eyes, pushes his tongue against the roof of his mouth. He
can hear Marianne laughing.
Why do you have to be so harsh on people? he says.
Im not being harsh. I dont care if youre blushing, I wont tell anyone.
Just because you wont tell people doesnt mean you can say whatever
you want.
Okay, she says. Sorry.
He turns and looks out the window at the garden. Really the garden is
more like grounds. It includes a tennis court and a large stone statue in the
shape of a woman. He looks out at the grounds and moves his face close
to the cool breath of the glass. When people tell that story about Marianne
washing her blouse in the sink, they act like its just funny, but Connell
thinks the real purpose of the story is something else. Marianne has never
been with anyone in school, no one has ever seen her undressed, no one
even knows if she likes boys or girls, she wont tell anyone. People resent
that about her, and Connell thinks thats why they tell the story, as a way of
gawking at something theyre not allowed to see.
I dont want to get into a fight with you, she says.
Were not fighting.
I know you probably hate me, but youre the only person who actually
talks to me.
I never said I hated you, he says.
That gets her attention, and she looks up. Confused, he continues
looking away from her, but in the corner of his eye he still sees her
watching. When he talks to Marianne he has a sense of total privacy
between them. He could tell her anything about himself, even weird things,
and she would never repeat them, he knows that. Being alone with her is
like opening a door away from normal life and then closing it behind him.
Hes not frightened of her, actually shes a pretty relaxed person, but he
fears being around her, because of the confusing way he finds himself
behaving, the things he says that he would never ordinarily say.
A few weeks ago when he was waiting for Lorraine in the hall,
Marianne came downstairs in a bathrobe. It was just a plain white bathrobe,
tied in the normal way. Her hair was wet, and her skin had that glistening
look like she had just been applying face cream. When she saw Connell,
she hesitated on the stairs and said: I didnt know you were here, sorry.
Maybe she seemed flustered, but not really badly or anything. Then she
went back up to her room. After she left he stood there in the hall waiting.
He knew she was probably getting dressed in her room, and whatever
clothes she was wearing when she came back down would be the clothes
she had chosen to put on after she saw him in the hall. Anyway Lorraine
was ready to go before Marianne reappeared so he never did get to see
what clothes she had put on. It wasnt like he deeply cared to know. He
certainly didnt tell anyone in school about it, that he had seen her in a
bathrobe, or that she looked flustered, it wasnt anyones business to know.
Well, I like you, Marianne says.
For a few seconds he says nothing, and the intensity of the privacy
between them is very severe, pressing in on him with an almost physical
pressure on his face and body. Then Lorraine comes back into the kitchen,
tying her scarf around her neck. She does a little knock on the door even
though its already open.
Good to go? she says.
Yeah, says Connell.
Thanks for everything, Lorraine, says Marianne. See you next week.
Connell is already heading out the kitchen door when his mother says:
You can say goodbye, cant you? He turns to look over his shoulder but
finds he cannot actually look Marianne in the eye, so he addresses himself
to the floor instead. Right, bye, he says. He doesnt wait to hear her reply.
In the car his mother puts on her seatbelt and shakes her head. You
could be a bit nicer to her, she says. She doesnt exactly have an easy time
of it in school.
He puts the keys in the ignition, glances in the rear-view. Im nice to
her, he says.
Shes actually a very sensitive person, says Lorraine.
Can we talk about something else?
Lorraine makes a face. He stares out the windshield and pretends not to
see.
Three Weeks Later
(FEBRUARY 2011)
She sits at her dressing table looking at her face in the mirror. Her face
lacks definition around the cheeks and jaw. Its a face like a piece of
technology, and her two eyes are cursors blinking. Or its reminiscent of the
moon reflected in something, wobbly and oblique. It expresses everything
all at once, which is the same as expressing nothing. To wear make-up for
this occasion would be, she concludes, embarrassing. Without breaking eye
contact with herself, she dips her finger in an open pot of clear lip balm and
applies it.
Downstairs, when she takes her coat off the hook, her brother Alan
comes out from the living room.
Where are you going? he says.
Out.
Wheres out?
She puts her arms through the sleeves of her coat and adjusts the collar.
Shes beginning to feel nervous now and hopes her silence is
communicating insolence rather than uncertainty.
Just out for a walk, she says.
Alan moves to stand in front of the door.
Well, I know youre not going out to meet friends, he says. Because you
dont have any friends, do you?
No, I dont.
She smiles now, a placid smile, hoping that this gesture of submission
will placate him and hell move away from the door. Instead he says: What
are you doing that for?
What? she says.
This weird smile youre doing.
He mimics her face, contorted into an ugly grin, teeth bared. Though
hes grinning, the force and extremity of this impersonation make him look
angry.
Are you happy that you dont have friends? he says.
No.
Still smiling, she takes two small steps backwards, and then turns and
walks towards the kitchen, where theres a patio door onto the garden. Alan
walks after her. He grabs her by the upper arm and tugs her back from the
door. She feels her jaw tighten. His fingers compress her arm through her
jacket.
If you go crying to Mam about this, says Alan.
No, says Marianne, no. Im just going out for a walk now. Thank you.
He releases her and she slips out through the patio door, closing it
behind her. Outside the air feels very cold and her teeth start to chatter. She
walks around the side of the house, down the driveway and out into the
street. Her arm is throbbing where he grabbed it. She takes her phone from
a pocket and composes a text, repeatedly hitting the wrong key, deleting
and retyping. Finally she sends it: On my way. Before she puts the phone
back, she receives a reply: cool see you soon.
*
At the end of last term, the school soccer team reached the final of some
competition and everyone in the year had to take the last three classes off to
go and watch them. Marianne had never seen them play before. She had no
interest in sport and suffered anxiety related to physical education. In the
bus on the way to the match she just listened to her headphones, no one
spoke to her. Out the window: black cattle, green meadows, white houses
with brown roof tiles. The football team were all together at the top of the
bus, drinking water and slapping each other on the shoulders to raise
morale. Marianne had the sense that her real life was happening somewhere
very far away, happening without her, and she didnt know if she would
ever find out where it was and become part of it. She had that feeling in
school often, but it wasnt accompanied by any specific images of what the
real life might look or feel like. All she knew was that when it started, she
wouldnt need to imagine it anymore.
It stayed dry for the match. They had been brought there for the purpose
of standing at the sidelines and cheering. Marianne was near the goalposts,
with Karen and some of the other girls. Everyone other than Marianne
seemed to know the school chants off by heart somehow, with lyrics she
had never heard before. By half-time it was still nil-all, and Miss Keaney
handed around boxes of juice and energy bars. For the second half, the ends
changed around, and the school forwards were playing near where
Marianne was standing. Connell Waldron was the centre forward. She
could see him standing there in his football kit, the shiny white shorts, the
school jersey with number nine on the back. He had very good posture,
more so than any of the other players. His figure was like a long elegant
line drawn with a brush. When the ball moved towards their end of the
pitch he tended to run around and maybe throw one of his hands in the air,
and then he went back to standing still. It was pleasurable to watch him,
and she didnt think he knew or cared where she was standing. After school
some day she could tell him she had been watching him, and hed laugh at
her and call her weird.
At seventy minutes Aidan Kennedy brought the ball up the left side of
the pitch and crossed it over to Connell, who took a shot from the corner of
the penalty area, over the heads of the defenders, and it spun into the back
of the net. Everyone screamed, even Marianne, and Karen threw her arm
around Mariannes waist and squeezed it. They were cheering together,
they had seen something magical which dissolved the ordinary social
relations between them. Miss Keaney was whistling and stamping her feet.
On the pitch Connell and Aidan embraced like reunited brothers. Connell
was so beautiful. It occurred to Marianne how much she wanted to see him
having sex with someone; it didnt have to be her, it could be anybody. It
would be beautiful just to watch him. She knew these were the kind of
thoughts that made her different from other people in school, and weirder.
Mariannes classmates all seem to like school so much and find it
normal. To dress in the same uniform every day, to comply at all times with
arbitrary rules, to be scrutinised and monitored for misbehaviour, this is
normal to them. They have no sense of the school as an oppressive
environment. Marianne had a row with the History teacher, Mr Kerrigan,
last year because he caught her looking out a window during class, and no
one in the class took her side. It seemed so obviously insane to her then that
she should have to dress up in a costume every morning and be herded
around a huge building all day, and that she wasnt even allowed to move
her eyes where she wanted, even her eye movements fell under the
jurisdiction of school rules. Youre not learning if youre staring out the
window daydreaming, Mr Kerrigan said. Marianne, who had lost her
temper by then, snapped back: Dont delude yourself, I have nothing to
learn from you.
Connell said recently that he remembered that incident, and that at the
time hed felt she was being harsh on Mr Kerrigan, who was actually one
of the more reasonable teachers. But I see what youre saying, Connell
added. About feeling a bit imprisoned in the school, I do see that. He
should have let you look out the window, I would agree there. You werent
doing any harm.
After their conversation in the kitchen, when she told him she liked him,
Connell started coming over to her house more often. He would arrive early
to pick his mother up from work and hang around in the living room not
saying much, or stand by the fireplace with his hands in his pockets.
Marianne never asked why he came over. They talked a little bit, or she
talked and he nodded. He told her she should try reading The Communist
Manifesto, he thought she would like it, and he offered to write down the
title for her so she wouldnt forget. I know what The Communist Manifesto
is called, she said. He shrugged, okay. After a moment he added, smiling:
Youre trying to act superior, but like, you havent even read it. She had to
laugh then, and he laughed because she did. They couldnt look at each
other when they were laughing, they had to look into corners of the room,
or at their feet.
Connell seemed to understand how she felt about school; he said he
liked hearing her opinions. You hear enough of them in class, she said.
Matter-of-factly he replied: You act different in class, youre not really like
that. He seemed to think Marianne had access to a range of different
identities, between which she slipped effortlessly. This surprised her,
because she usually felt confined inside one single personality, which was
always the same regardless of what she did or said. She had tried to be
different in the past, as a kind of experiment, but it had never worked. If
she was different with Connell, the difference was not happening inside
herself, in her personhood, but in between them, in the dynamic.
Sometimes she made him laugh, but other days he was taciturn, inscrutable,
and after he left she would feel high, nervous, at once energetic and terribly
drained.
He followed her into the study last week while she was looking for a
copy of The Fire Next Time to lend him. He stood there inspecting the
bookshelves, with his top shirt button undone and school tie loosened. She
found the book and handed it to him, and he sat down on the window seat
looking at the back cover. She sat beside him and asked him if his friends
Eric and Rob knew that he read so much outside school.
They wouldnt be interested in that stuff, he said.
You mean theyre not interested in the world around them.
Connell made the face he always made when she criticised his friends,
an inexpressive frown. Not in the same way, he said. They have their own
interests. I dont think theyd be reading books about racism and all that.
Right, theyre too busy bragging about who theyre having sex with, she
said.
He paused for a second, like his ears had pricked up at this remark but
he didnt know exactly how to respond. Yeah, they do a bit of that, he said.
Im not defending it, I know they can be annoying.
Doesnt it bother you?
He paused again. Most of it wouldnt, he said. They do some stuff that
goes a bit over the line and that would annoy me obviously. But at the end
of the day theyre my friends, you know. Its different for you.
She looked at him, but he was examining the spine of the book.
Why is it different? she said.
He shrugged, bending the book cover back and forth. She felt frustrated.
Her face and hands were hot. He kept on looking at the book although hed
certainly read all the text on the back by then. She was attuned to the
presence of his body in a microscopic way, as if the ordinary motion of his
breathing was powerful enough to make her ill.
You know you were saying the other day that you like me, he said. In
the kitchen you said it, when we were talking about school.
Yeah.
Did you mean like as a friend, or what?
She stared down into her lap. She was wearing a corduroy skirt and in
the light from the window she could see it was flecked with pieces of lint.
No, not just as a friend, she said.
Oh, okay. I was wondering.
He sat there, nodding to himself.
Im kind of confused about what I feel, he added. I think it would be
awkward in school if anything happened with us.
No one would have to know.
He looked up at her, directly, with total attention. She knew he was
going to kiss her, and he did. His lips were soft. His tongue moved into her
mouth slightly. Then it was over and he was drawing away. He seemed to
remember he was holding the book, and began to look at it again.
That was nice, she said.
He nodded, swallowed, glanced down at the book once more. His
attitude was so sheepish, as if it had been rude of her even to make
reference to the kiss, that Marianne started to laugh. He looked flustered
then.
Alright, he said. What are you laughing for?
Nothing.
Youre acting like youve never kissed anyone before.
Well, I havent, she said.
He put his hand over his face. She laughed again, she couldnt stop
herself, and then he was laughing too. His ears were very red and he was
shaking his head. After a few seconds he stood up, holding the book in his
hand.
Dont go telling people in school about this, okay? he said.
Like I would talk to anyone in school.
He left the room. Weakly she crumpled off the seat, down onto the floor,
with her legs stretched out in front of her like a rag doll. While she sat there
she felt as if Connell had been visiting her house only to test her, and she
had passed the test, and the kiss was a communication that said: You
passed. She thought of the way hed laughed when she said shed never
kissed anyone before. For another person to laugh that way might have
been cruel, but it wasnt like that with him. Theyd been laughing together,
at a shared situation theyd found themselves in, though how to describe
the situation or what was funny about it Marianne didnt know exactly.
The next morning before German class she sat watching her classmates
shove each other off the storage heaters, shrieking and giggling. When the
lesson began they listened quietly to an audio tape of a German woman
speaking about a party she had missed. Es tut mir sehr leid. In the
afternoon it started snowing, thick grey flakes that fluttered past the
windows and melted on the gravel. Everything looked and felt sensuous:
the stale smell of classrooms, the tinny intercom bell that sounded between
lessons, the dark austere trees that stood like apparitions around the
basketball court. The slow routine work of copying out notes in differentcoloured
pens on fresh blue-and-white lined paper. Connell, as usual, did
not speak to Marianne in school or even look at her. She watched him
across classrooms as he conjugated verbs, chewing on the end of his pen.
On the other side of the cafeteria at lunchtime, smiling about something
with his friends. Their secret weighed inside her body pleasurably, pressing
down on her pelvic bone when she moved.
She didnt see him after school that day, or the next. On Thursday
afternoon his mother was working again and he arrived early to pick her
up. Marianne had to answer the door because no one else was home. He
had changed out of his school uniform, he was wearing black jeans and a
sweatshirt. When she saw him she had an instinct to run away and hide her
face. Lorraines in the kitchen, she said. Then she turned and went upstairs
to her room and closed the door. She lay face down on the bed breathing
into the pillow. Who was this person Connell anyway? She felt she knew
him very intimately, but what reason did she have to feel that? Just because
he had kissed her once, with no explanation, and then warned her not to tell
anyone? After a minute or two she heard a knock on her bedroom door and
she sat up. Come in, she said. He opened the door and, giving her an
enquiring look as if to see whether he was welcome, entered the room and
closed the door behind him.
Are you pissed off with me? he said.
No. Why would I be?
He shrugged. Idly he wandered over to the bed and sat down. She was
sitting cross-legged, holding her ankles. They sat there in silence for a few
moments. Then he got onto the bed with her. He touched her leg and she
lay back against the pillow. Boldly she asked if he was going to kiss her
again. He said: What do you think? This struck her as a highly cryptic and
sophisticated thing to say. Anyway he did start to kiss her. She told him that
it was nice and he just said nothing. She felt she would do anything to
make him like her, to make him say out loud that he liked her. He put his
hand under her school blouse. In his ear, she said: Can we take our clothes
off? He had his hand inside her bra. Definitely not, he said. This is stupid
anyway, Lorraine is right downstairs. He called his mother by her first
name like that. Marianne said: She never comes up here. He shook his head
and said: No, we should stop. He sat up and looked down at her.
You were tempted for a second there, she said.
Not really.
I tempted you.
He was shaking his head, smiling. Youre such a strange person, he said.
*
Now shes standing in his driveway, where his car is parked. He texted her
the address, its number 33: a terraced house with pebble-dash walls, net
curtains, a tiny concrete yard. She can see a light switched on in the
upstairs window. Its hard to believe he really lives in there, a house she has
never been inside or even seen before. Shes wearing a black sweater, grey
skirt, cheap black underwear. Her legs are shaved meticulously, her
underarms are smooth and chalky with deodorant, and her nose is running a
little. She rings the doorbell and hears his footsteps coming down the stairs.
He opens the door. Before he lets her in he looks over her shoulder, to
make sure that no one has seen her arrive.
One Month Later
(MARCH 2011)
Theyre talking about their college applications. Marianne is lying with the
bedsheet pulled carelessly over her body, and Connells sitting up with her
MacBook in his lap. Shes already applied for History and Politics in
Trinity. Hes put down Law in Galway, but now he thinks that he might
change it, because, as Marianne has pointed out, he has no interest in Law.
He cant even visually imagine himself as a lawyer, wearing a tie and so
on, possibly helping to convict people of crimes. He just put it down
because he couldnt think of anything else.
You should study English, says Marianne.
Do you think I should, or are you joking?
I think you should. Its the only subject you really enjoy in school. And
you spend all your free time reading.
He looks at the laptop blankly, and then at the thin yellow bedsheet
draped over her body, which casts a lilac triangle of shadow on her breast.
Not all my free time, he says.
She smiles. Plus the class will be full of girls, she says, so youll be a
total stud.
Yeah. Im not sure about the job prospects, though.
Oh, who cares? The economys fucked anyway.
The laptop screen has gone black now and he taps the trackpad to light
it up again. The college applications webpage stares back at him.
*
After the first time they had sex, Marianne stayed the night in his house. He
had never been with a girl who was a virgin before. In total he had only had
sex a small number of times, and always with girls who went on to tell the
whole school about it afterwards. Hed had to hear his actions repeated
back to him later in the locker room: his errors, and, so much worse, his
excruciating attempts at tenderness, performed in gigantic pantomime.
With Marianne it was different, because everything was between them
only, even awkward or difficult things. He could do or say anything he
wanted with her and no one would ever find out. It gave him a vertiginous,
lightheaded feeling to think about it. When he touched her that night she
was so wet, and she rolled her eyes back into her head and said: God, yes.
And she was allowed to say it, no one would know. He was afraid he would
come then just from touching her like that.
In the hallway the next morning he kissed her goodbye and her mouth
tasted alkaline, like toothpaste. Thanks, she said. Then she left, before he
understood what he was being thanked for. He put the bedsheets in the
washing machine and took fresh linen from the hot press. He was thinking
about what a secretive, independent-minded person Marianne was, that she
could come over to his house and let him have sex with her, and she felt no
need to tell anyone about it. She just let things happen, like nothing meant
anything to her.
Lorraine got home that afternoon. Before shed even put her keys on the
table she said: Is that the washing machine? Connell nodded. She crouched
down and looked through the round glass window into the drum, where his
sheets were tossing around in the froth.
Im not going to ask, she said.
What?
She started to fill the kettle, while he leaned against the countertop.
Why your bedclothes are in the wash, she said. Im not asking.
He rolled his eyes just for something to do with his face. You think the
worst of everything, he said.
She laughed, fixing the kettle into its cradle and hitting the switch.
Excuse me, she said. I must be the most permissive mother of anyone in
your school. As long as youre using protection, you can do what you want.
He said nothing. The kettle started to warm up and she took a clean mug
down from the press.
Well? she said. Is that a yes?
Yes what? Obviously I didnt have unprotected sex with anyone while
you were gone. Jesus.
So go on, whats her name?
He left the room then but he could hear his mother laughing as he went
up the stairs. His life is always giving her amusement.
In school on Monday he had to avoid looking at Marianne or interacting
with her in any way. He carried the secret around like something large and
hot, like an overfull tray of hot drinks that he had to carry everywhere and
never spill. She just acted the same as always, like it never happened,
reading her book at the lockers as usual, getting into pointless arguments.
At lunchtime on Tuesday, Rob started asking questions about Connells
mother working in Mariannes house, and Connell just ate his lunch and
tried not to make any facial expressions.
Would you ever go in there yourself? Rob said. Into the mansion.
Connell jogged his bag of chips in his hand and then peered into it. Ive
been in there a few times, yeah, he said.
Whats it like inside?
He shrugged. I dont know, he said. Big, obviously.
Whats she like in her natural habitat? Rob said.
I dont know.
Id say she thinks of you as her butler, does she?
Connell wiped his mouth with the back of his hand. It felt greasy. His
chips were too salty and he had a headache.
I doubt it, Connell said.
But your mam is her housemaid, isnt she?
Well, shes just a cleaner. Shes only there like twice a week, I dont
think they interact much.
Does Marianne not have a little bell she would ring to get her attention,
no? Rob said.
Connell said nothing. He didnt understand the situation with Marianne
at that point. After he talked to Rob he told himself it was over, hed just
had sex with her once to see what it was like, and he wouldnt see her
again. Even as he was saying all this to himself, however, he could hear
another part of his brain, in a different voice, saying: Yes you will. It was a
part of his consciousness he had never really known before, this
inexplicable drive to act on perverse and secret desires. He found himself
fantasising about her in class that afternoon, at the back of Maths, or when
they were supposed to be playing rounders. He would think of her small
wet mouth and suddenly run out of breath, and have to struggle to fill his
lungs.
That afternoon he went to her house after school. All the way over in
the car he kept the radio on very loud so he didnt have to think about what
he was doing. When they went upstairs he didnt say anything, he let her
talk. Thats so good, she kept saying. That feels so good. Her body was all
soft and white like flour dough. He seemed to fit perfectly inside her.
Physically it just felt right, and he understood why people did insane things
for sexual reasons then. In fact he understood a lot of things about the adult
world that had previously seemed mysterious. But why Marianne? It wasnt
like she was so attractive. Some people thought she was the ugliest girl in
school. What kind of person would want to do this with her? And yet he
was there, whatever kind of person he was, doing it. She asked him if it felt
good and he pretended he didnt hear her. She was on her hands and knees
so he couldnt see her facial expression or read into it what she was
thinking. After a few seconds she said in a much smaller voice: Am I doing
something wrong? He closed his eyes.
No, he said. I like it.
Her breath sounded ragged then. He pulled her hips back against his
body and then released her slightly. She made a noise like she was choking.
He did it again and she told him she was going to come. Thats good, he
said. He said this like nothing could be more ordinary to him. His decision
to drive to Mariannes house that afternoon suddenly seemed very correct
and intelligent, maybe the only intelligent thing he had ever done in his life.
After they were finished he asked her what he should do with the
condom. Without lifting her face off the pillow she said: You can just leave
it on the floor. Her face was pink and damp. He did what she said and then
lay on his back looking up at the light fixtures. I like you so much,
Marianne said. Connell felt a pleasurable sorrow come over him, which
brought him close to tears. Moments of emotional pain arrived like this,
meaningless or at least indecipherable. Marianne lived a drastically free
life, he could see that. He was trapped by various considerations. He cared
what people thought of him. He even cared what Marianne thought, that
was obvious now.
Multiple times he has tried writing his thoughts about Marianne down
on paper in an effort to make sense of them. Hes moved by a desire to
describe in words exactly how she looks and speaks. Her hair and clothing.
The copy of Swanns Way she reads at lunchtime in the school cafeteria,
with a dark French painting on the cover and a mint-coloured spine. Her
long fingers turning the pages. Shes not leading the same kind of life as
other people. She acts so worldly at times, making him feel ignorant, but
then she can be so naive. He wants to understand how her mind works. If
he silently decides not to say something when theyre talking, Marianne
will ask what? within one or two seconds. This what? question seems to
him to contain so much: not just the forensic attentiveness to his silences
that allows her to ask in the first place, but a desire for total
communication, a sense that anything unsaid is an unwelcome interruption
between them. He writes these things down, long run-on sentences with too
many dependent clauses, sometimes connected with breathless semicolons,
as if he wants to recreate a precise copy of Marianne in print, as if he can
preserve her completely for future review. Then he turns a new page in the
notebook so he doesnt have to look at what hes done.
*
What are you thinking about? says Marianne now.
Shes tucking her hair behind her ear.
College, he says.
You should apply for English in Trinity.
He stares at the webpage again. Lately hes consumed by a sense that he
is in fact two separate people, and soon he will have to choose which
person to be on a full-time basis, and leave the other person behind. He has
a life in Carricklea, he has friends. If he went to college in Galway he could
stay with the same social group, really, and live the life he has always
planned on, getting a good degree, having a nice girlfriend. People would
say he had done well for himself. On the other hand, he could go to Trinity
like Marianne. Life would be different then. He would start going to dinner
parties and having conversations about the Greek bailout. He could fuck
some weird-looking girls who turn out to be bisexual. Ive read The Golden
Notebook, he could tell them. Its true, he has read it. After that he would
never come back to Carricklea, he would go somewhere else, London, or
Barcelona. People would not necessarily think he had done well; some
people might think he had gone very bad, while others would forget about
him entirely. What would Lorraine think? She would want him to be happy,
and not care what others said. But the old Connell, the one all his friends
know: that person would be dead in a way, or worse, buried alive, and
screaming under the earth.
Then wed both be in Dublin, he says. I bet youd pretend you didnt
know me if we bumped into each other.
Marianne says nothing at first. The longer she stays silent the more
nervous he feels, like maybe she really would pretend not to know him, and
the idea of being beneath her notice gives him a panicked feeling, not only
about Marianne personally but about his future, about whats possible for
him.
Then she says: I would never pretend not to know you, Connell.
The silence becomes very intense after that. For a few seconds he lies
still. Of course, he pretends not to know Marianne in school, but he didnt
mean to bring that up. Thats just the way it has to be. If people found out
what he has been doing with Marianne, in secret, while ignoring her every
day in school, his life would be over. He would walk down the hallway and
peoples eyes would follow him, like he was a serial killer, or worse. His
friends dont think of him as a deviant person, a person who could say to
Marianne Sheridan, in broad daylight, completely sober: Is it okay if I
come in your mouth? With his friends he acts normal. He and Marianne
have their own private life in his room where no one can bother them, so
theres no reason to mix up the separate worlds. Still, he can tell he has lost
his footing in their discussion and left an opening for this subject to arise,
though he didnt want it to, and now he has to say something.
Would you not? he says.
No.
Alright, Ill put down English in Trinity, then.
Really? she says.
Yeah. I dont care that much about getting a job anyway.
She gives him a little smile, like she feels she has won the argument. He
likes to give her that feeling. For a moment it seems possible to keep both
worlds, both versions of his life, and to move in between them just like
moving through a door. He can have the respect of someone like Marianne
and also be well liked in school, he can form secret opinions and
preferences, no conflict has to arise, he never has to choose one thing over
another. With only a little subterfuge he can live two entirely separate
existences, never confronting the ultimate question of what to do with
himself or what kind of person he is. This thought is so consoling that for a
few seconds he avoids meeting Mariannes eye, wanting to sustain the
belief for just a little longer. He knows that when he looks at her, he wont
be able to believe it anymore.
Six Weeks Later
(APRIL 2011)
They have her name on a list. She shows the bouncer her ID. When she
gets inside, the interior is low-lit, cavernous, vaguely purple, with long bars
on either side and steps down to a dance floor. It smells of stale alcohol and
the flat tinny ring of dry ice. Some of the other girls from the fundraising
committee are sitting around a table already, looking at lists. Hi, Marianne
says. They turn around and look at her.
Hello, says Lisa. Dont you scrub up well?
You look gorgeous, says Karen.
Rachel Moran says nothing. Everyone knows that Rachel is the most
popular girl in school, but no one is allowed to say this. Instead everyone
has to pretend not to notice that their social lives are arranged
hierarchically, with certain people at the top, some jostling at mid-level,
and others lower down. Marianne sometimes sees herself at the very
bottom of the ladder, but at other times she pictures herself off the ladder
completely, not affected by its mechanics, since she does not actually desire
popularity or do anything to make it belong to her. From her vantage point
it is not obvious what rewards the ladder provides, even to those who really
are at the top. She rubs her upper arm and says: Thanks. Would anyone like
a drink? Im going to the bar anyway.
I thought you didnt drink alcohol, says Rachel.
Ill have a bottle of West Coast Cooler, Karen says. If youre sure.
Wine is the only alcoholic beverage Marianne has ever tried, but when
she goes to the bar she decides to order a gin and tonic. The barman looks
frankly at her breasts while shes talking. Marianne had no idea men really
did such things outside of films and TV, and the experience gives her a
little thrill of femininity. Shes wearing a filmy black dress that clings to
her body. The place is still almost empty now, though the event has
technically started. Back at the table Karen thanks her extravagantly for the
drink. Ill get you back, she says. Dont worry about it, says Marianne,
waving her hand.
Eventually people start arriving. The music comes on, a pounding
Destinys Child remix, and Rachel gives Marianne the book of raffle tickets
and explains the pricing system. Marianne was voted onto the Debs
fundraising committee presumably as some kind of joke, but she has to
help organise the events anyway. Ticket book in hand, she continues to
hover beside the other girls. Shes used to observing these people from a
distance, almost scientifically, but tonight, having to make conversation
and smile politely, shes no longer an observer but an intruder, and an
awkward one. She sells some tickets, dispensing change from the pouch in
her purse, she buys more drinks, she glances at the door and looks away in
disappointment.
The lads are fairly late, says Lisa.
Of all the possible lads, Marianne knows who is specified: Rob, with
whom Lisa has an on-again off-again relationship, and his friends Eric,
Jack Hynes and Connell Waldron. Their lateness has not escaped
Mariannes notice.
If they dont show up I will actually murder Connell, says Rachel. He
told me yesterday they were definitely coming.
Marianne says nothing. Rachel often talks about Connell this way,
alluding to private conversations that have happened between them, as if
they are special confidants. Connell ignores this behaviour, but he also
ignores the hints Marianne drops about it when theyre alone together.
Theyre probably still pre-drinking in Robs, says Lisa.
Theyll be absolutely binned by the time they get here, says Karen.
Marianne takes her phone from her bag and writes Connell a text
message: Lively discussion here on the subject of your absence. Are you
planning to come at all? Within thirty seconds he replies: yeah jack just got
sick everywhere so we had to put him in a taxi etc. on our way soon
though. how are you getting on socialising with people. Marianne writes
back: Im the new popular girl in school now. Everyones carrying me
around the dance floor chanting my name. She puts her phone back in her
bag. Nothing would feel more exhilarating to her at this moment than to
say: Theyll be on their way shortly. How much terrifying and bewildering
status would accrue to her in this one moment, how destabilising it would
be, how destructive.
*
Although Carricklea is the only place Marianne has ever lived, its not a
town she knows particularly well. She doesnt go drinking in the pubs on
Main Street, and before tonight she had never been to the towns only
nightclub. She has never visited the Knocklyon housing estate. She doesnt
know the name of the river that runs brown and bedraggled past the Centra
and behind the church car park, snagging thin plastic bags in its current, or
where the river goes next. Who would tell her? The only time she leaves
the house is to go to school, and the enforced Mass trip on Sundays, and to
Connells house when no one is home. She knows how long it takes to get
to Sligo town  twenty minutes  but the locations of other nearby towns,
and their sizes in relation to Carricklea, are a mystery to her. Coolaney,
Skreen, Ballysadare, shes pretty sure these are all in the vicinity of
Carricklea, and the names ring bells for her in a vague way, but she doesnt
know where they are. Shes never been inside the sports centre. Shes never
gone drinking in the abandoned hat factory, though she has been driven
past it in the car.
Likewise, its impossible for her to know which families in town are
considered good families and which arent. Its the kind of thing she would
like to know, just to be able to reject it the more completely. Shes from a
good family and Connell is from a bad one, that much she does know. The
Waldrons are notorious in Carricklea. One of Lorraines brothers was in
prison once, Marianne doesnt know for what, and another one got into a
motorcycle crash off the roundabout a few years ago and almost died. And
of course, Lorraine got pregnant at seventeen and left school to have the
baby. Nonetheless Connell is considered quite a catch these days. Hes
studious, he plays centre forward in football, hes good-looking, he doesnt
get into fights. Everybody likes him. Hes quiet. Even Mariannes mother
will say approvingly: That boy is nothing like a Waldron. Mariannes
mother is a solicitor. Her father was a solicitor too.
Last week, Connell mentioned something called the ghost. Marianne
had never heard of it before, she had to ask him what it was. His eyebrows
shot up. The ghost, he said. The ghost estate, Mountain View. Its like, right
behind the school. Marianne had been vaguely aware of some construction
on the land behind the school, but she didnt know there was a housing
estate there now, or that no one lived in it. People go drinking there,
Connell added. Oh, said Marianne. She asked what it was like. He said he
wished he could show her, but there were always people around. He often
makes blithe remarks about things he wishes. I wish you didnt have to
go, he says when shes leaving, or: I wish you could stay the night. If he
really wished for any of those things, Marianne knows, then they would
happen. Connell always gets what he wants, and then feels sorry for
himself when what he wants doesnt make him happy.
Anyway, he did end up taking her to see the ghost estate. They drove
there in his car one afternoon and he went out first to make sure no one was
around before she followed him. The houses were huge, with bare concrete
facades and overgrown front lawns. Some of the empty window holes were
covered over in plastic sheeting, which whipped around loudly in the wind.
It was raining and she had left her jacket in the car. She crossed her arms,
squinting up at the wet slate roofs.
Do you want to look inside? Connell said.
The front door of number 23 was unlocked. It was quieter in the house,
and darker. The place was filthy. With the toe of her shoe Marianne
prodded at an empty cider bottle. There were cigarette butts all over the
floor and someone had dragged a mattress into the otherwise bare living
room. The mattress was stained badly with damp and what looked like
blood. Pretty sordid, Marianne said aloud. Connell was quiet, just looking
around.
Do you hang out here much? she said.
He gave a kind of shrug. Not much, he said. Used to a bit, not much
anymore.
Please tell me youve never had sex on that mattress.
He smiled absently. No, he said. Is that what you think I get up to at the
weekend, is it?
Kind of.
He didnt say anything then, which made her feel even worse. He
kicked a crushed can of Dutch Gold aimlessly and sent it skidding towards
the French doors.
This is probably three times the size of my house, he said. Would you
say?
She felt foolish for not realising what he had been thinking about.
Probably, she said. I havent seen upstairs, obviously.
Four bedrooms.
Jesus.
Just lying empty, no one living in it, he said. Why dont they give them
away if they cant sell them? Im not being thick with you, Im genuinely
asking.
She shrugged. She didnt actually understand why.
Its something to do with capitalism, she said.
Yeah. Everything is, thats the problem, isnt it?
She nodded. He looked over at her, as if coming out of a dream.
Are you cold? he said. You look like youre freezing.
She smiled, rubbed at her nose. He unzipped his black puffer jacket and
put it over her shoulders. They were standing very close. She would have
lain on the ground and let him walk over her body if he wanted, he knew
that.
When I go out at the weekend or whatever, he said, I dont go after
other girls or anything.
Marianne smiled and said: No, I guess they come after you.
He grinned, he looked down at his shoes. You have a very funny idea of
me, he said.
She closed her fingers around his school tie. It was the first time in her
life she could say shocking things and use bad language, so she did it a lot.
If I wanted you to fuck me here, she said, would you do it?
His expression didnt change but his hands moved around under her
jumper to show he was listening. After a few seconds he said: Yeah. If you
wanted to, yeah. Youre always making me do such weird things.
What does that mean? she said. I cant make you do anything.
Yeah, you can. Do you think theres any other person I would do this
type of thing with? Seriously, do you think anyone else could make me
sneak around after school and all this?
What do you want me to do? Leave you alone?
He looked at her, seemingly taken aback by this turn in the discussion.
Shaking his head, he said: If you did that 
She looked at him but he didnt say anything else.
If I did that, what? she said.
I dont know. You mean, if you just didnt want to see each other
anymore? I would feel surprised honestly, because you seem like you enjoy
it.
And what if I met someone else who liked me more?
He laughed. She turned away crossly, pulling out of his grasp, wrapping
her arms around her chest. He said hey, but she didnt turn around. She was
facing the disgusting mattress with the rust-coloured stains all over it.
Gently he came up behind her and lifted her hair to kiss the back of her
neck.
Sorry for laughing, he said. Youre making me insecure, talking about
not wanting to hang out with me anymore. I thought you liked me.
She shut her eyes. I do like you, she said.
Well, if you met someone else you liked more, Id be pissed off, okay?
Since you ask about it. I wouldnt be happy. Alright?
Your friend Eric called me flat-chested today in front of everyone.
Connell paused. She felt his breathing. I didnt hear that, he said.
You were in the bathroom or somewhere. He said I looked like an
ironing board.
Fucks sake, hes such a prick. Is that why youre in a bad mood?
She shrugged. Connell put his arms around her belly.
Hes only trying to get on your nerves, he said. If he thought he had the
slightest chance with you, he would be talking very differently. He just
thinks you look down on him.
She shrugged again, chewing on her lower lip.
You have nothing to worry about with your appearance, Connell said.
Hm.
I dont just like you for your brains, trust me.
She laughed, feeling silly.
He rubbed her ear with his nose and added: I would miss you if you
didnt want to see me anymore.
Would you miss sleeping with me? she said.
He touched his hand against her hipbone, rocking her back against his
body, and said quietly: Yeah, a lot.
Can we go back to your house now?
He nodded. For a few seconds they just stood there in stillness, his arms
around her, his breath on her ear. Most people go through their whole lives,
Marianne thought, without ever really feeling that close with anyone.
*
Finally, after her third gin and tonic, the door bangs open and the boys
arrive. The committee girls get up and start teasing them, scolding them for
being late, things like that. Marianne hangs back, searching for Connells
eye contact, which he doesnt return. Hes dressed in a white button-down
shirt, the same Adidas sneakers he wears everywhere. The other boys are
wearing shirts too, but more formal-looking, shinier, and worn with leather
dress shoes. Theres a heavy, stirring smell of aftershave in the air. Eric
catches Mariannes eye and suddenly lets go of Karen, a move obvious
enough that everyone else looks around too.
Look at you, Marianne, says Eric.
She cant tell immediately whether hes being sincere or mocking. All
the boys are looking at her now except Connell.
Im serious, Eric says. Great dress, very sexy.
Rachel starts laughing, leans in to say something in Connells ear. He
turns his face away slightly and doesnt laugh along. Marianne feels a
certain pressure in her head that she wants to relieve by screaming or
crying.
Lets go and have a dance, says Karen.
Ive never seen Marianne dancing, Rachel says.
Well, you can see her now, says Karen.
Karen takes Mariannes hand and pulls her towards the dance floor.
Theres a Kanye West song playing, the one with the Curtis Mayfield
sample. Marianne is still holding the raffle book in one hand, and she feels
the other hand damp inside Karens. The dance floor is crowded and sends
shudders of bass up through her shoes into her legs. Karen props an arm on
Mariannes shoulder, drunkenly, and says in her ear: Dont mind Rachel,
shes in foul humour. Marianne nods her head, moving her body in time
with the music. Feeling drunk now, she turns to search the room, wanting
to know where Connell is. Right away she sees him, standing at the top of
the steps. Hes watching her. The music is so loud it throbs inside her body.
Around him the others are talking and laughing. Hes just looking at her
and saying nothing. Under his gaze her movements feel magnified,
scandalous, and the weight of Karens arm on her shoulder is sensual and
hot. She rocks her hips forward and runs a hand loosely through her hair.
In her ear Karen says: Hes been watching you the whole time.
Marianne looks at him and then back at Karen, saying nothing, trying
not to let her face say anything.
Now you see why Rachels in a bad mood with you, says Karen.
She can smell the wine spritzer on Karens breath when she speaks, she
can see her fillings. She likes her so much at that moment. They dance a
little more and then go back upstairs together, hand in hand, out of breath
now, grinning about nothing. Eric and Rob are pretending to have an
argument. Connell moves towards Marianne almost imperceptibly, and
their arms touch. She wants to pick up his hand and suck on his fingertips
one after another.
Rachel turns to her then and says: You might try actually selling some
raffle tickets at some point?
Marianne smiles, and the smile that comes out is smug, almost derisive,
and she says: Okay.
I think these lads might want to buy some, says Eric.
He nods over at the door, where some older guys have arrived. Theyre
not supposed to be here, the nightclub said it would be ticket-holders only.
Marianne doesnt know who they are, someones brothers or cousins
maybe, or just men in their twenties who like to hang around school
fundraisers. They see Eric waving and come over. Marianne looks in her
purse for the cash pouch in case they do want to buy raffle tickets.
How are things, Eric? says one of the men. Whos your friend here?
Thats Marianne Sheridan, Eric says. Youd know her brother, Id say.
Alan, he wouldve been in Micks year.
The man just nods, looking Marianne up and down. She feels indifferent
to his attention. The music is too loud to hear what Rob is saying in Erics
ear, but Marianne feels it has to do with her.
Let me get you a drink, the man says. What are you having?
No, thanks, says Marianne.
The man slips an arm around her shoulders then. Hes very tall, she
notices. Taller than Connell. His fingers rub her bare arm. She tries to shrug
him off but he doesnt let go. One of his friends starts laughing, and Eric
laughs along.
Nice dress, the man says.
Can you let go of me? she says.
Very low-cut there, isnt it?
In one motion he moves his hand down from her shoulder and squeezes
the flesh of her right breast, in front of everyone. Instantly she jerks away
from him, pulling her dress up to her collarbone, feeling her face fill with
blood. Her eyes are stinging and she feels a pain where he grabbed her.
Behind her the others are laughing. She can hear them. Rachel is laughing,
a high fluting noise in Mariannes ears.
Without turning around, Marianne walks out the door, lets it slam
behind her. Shes in the hallway now with the cloakroom and cant
remember whether the exit is right or left. Shes shaking all over her body.
The cloakroom attendant asks if shes alright. Marianne doesnt know
anymore how drunk she is. She walks a few steps towards a door on the left
and then puts her back against the wall and starts sliding down towards a
seated position on the floor. Her breast is aching where that man grabbed it.
He wasnt joking, he wanted to hurt her. Shes on the floor now hugging
her knees against her chest.
Up the hall the door comes open again and Karen comes out, with Eric
and Rachel and Connell following. They see Marianne on the floor and
Karen runs over to her while the other three stay standing where they are,
not knowing what to do maybe, or not wanting to do anything. Karen
hunches down in front of Marianne and touches her hand. Mariannes eyes
are sore and she doesnt know where to look.
Are you alright? Karen says.
Im fine, says Marianne. Im sorry. I think I just had too much to drink.
Leave her, says Rachel.
Here, look, it was just a bit of fun, says Eric. Pats actually a sound
enough guy if you get to know him.
I think it was funny, says Rachel.
At this Karen snaps around and looks at them. Why are you even out
here if you think it was so funny? she says. Why dont you go and pal
around with your best friend Pat? If you think its so funny to molest young
girls?
How is Marianne young? says Eric.
We were all laughing at the time, says Rachel.
Thats not true, says Connell.
Everyone looks around at him then. Marianne looks at him. Their eyes
meet.
Are you okay, are you? he says.
Oh, do you want to kiss her better? says Rachel.
His face is flushed now, and he touches a hand to his brow. Everyone is
still watching him. The wall feels cold against Mariannes back.
Rachel, he says, would you ever fuck off?
Karen and Eric exchange a look then, eyes wide, Marianne can see
them. Connell never speaks or acts like this in school. In all these years she
has never seen him behave at all aggressively, even when taunted. Rachel
just tosses her head and walks back inside the club. The door falls shut
heavily on its hinges. Connell continues rubbing his brow for a second.
Karen mouths something at Eric, Marianne doesnt know what it is. Then
Connell looks at Marianne and says: Do you want to go home? Im driving,
I can drop you. She nods her head. Karen helps her up from the floor.
Connell puts his hands in his pockets as if to prevent himself touching her
by accident. Sorry for making a fuss, Marianne says to Karen. I feel stupid.
Im not used to drinking.
Its not your fault, says Karen.
Thank you for being so nice, Marianne says.
They squeeze hands once more. Marianne follows Connell towards the
exit then and around the side of the hotel, to where his car is parked. Its
dark and cool out here, with the sound of music from the nightclub pulsing
faintly behind them. She gets in the passenger seat and puts her seatbelt on.
He closes the drivers door and puts his keys in the ignition.
Sorry for making a fuss, she says again.
You didnt, says Connell. Im sorry the others were being so stupid
about it. They just think Pat is great because he has these parties in his
house sometimes. Apparently if you have house parties its okay to mess
with people, I dont know.
It really hurt. What he did.
Connell says nothing then. He just kneads the steering wheel with his
hands. He looks down into his lap, and exhales quickly, almost like a
cough. Sorry, he says. Then he starts the car. They drive for a few minutes
in silence, Marianne cooling her forehead against the window.
Do you want to come back to my house for a bit? he says.
Is Lorraine not there?
He shrugs. He taps his fingers on the wheel. Shes probably in bed
already, he says. I mean we could just hang out for a bit before I drop you
home. Its okay if you dont want to.
What if shes still up?
Honestly shes pretty relaxed about this sort of stuff anyway. Like I
really dont think she would care.
Marianne stares out the window at the passing town. She knows what
hes saying: that he doesnt mind if his mother finds out about them. Maybe
she already knows.
Lorraine seems like a really good parent, Marianne remarks.
Yeah. I think so.
She must be proud of you. Youre the only boy in school whos actually
turned out well as an adult.
Connell glances over at her. How have I turned out well? he says.
What do you mean? Everyone likes you. And unlike most people youre
actually a nice person.
He makes a facial expression she cant interpret, kind of raising his
eyebrows, or frowning. When they get back to his house the windows are
all dark and Lorraine is in bed. In Connells room he and Marianne lie
down together whispering. He tells her that shes beautiful. She has never
heard that before, though she has sometimes privately suspected it of
herself, but it feels different to hear it from another person. She touches his
hand to her breast where it hurts, and he kisses her. Her face is wet, shes
been crying. He kisses her neck. Are you okay? he says. When she nods, he
smooths her hair back and says: Its alright to be upset, you know. She lies
with her face against his chest. She feels like a soft piece of cloth that is
wrung out and dripping.
You would never hit a girl, would you? she says.
God, no. Of course not. Why would you ask that?
I dont know.
Do you think Im the kind of person who would go around hitting girls?
he says.
She presses her face very hard against his chest. My dad used to hit my
mum, she says. For a few seconds, which seems like an unbelievably long
time, Connell says nothing. Then he says: Jesus. Im sorry. I didnt know
that.
Its okay, she says.
Did he ever hit you?
Sometimes.
Connell is silent again. He leans down and kisses her on the forehead. I
would never hurt you, okay? he says. Never. She nods and says nothing.
You make me really happy, he says. His hand moves over her hair and he
adds: I love you. Im not just saying that, I really do. Her eyes fill up with
tears again and she closes them. Even in memory she will find this moment
unbearably intense, and shes aware of this now, while its happening. She
has never believed herself fit to be loved by any person. But now she has a
new life, of which this is the first moment, and even after many years have
passed she will still think: Yes, that was it, the beginning of my life.
Two Days Later
(APRIL 2011)
He stands at the side of the bed while his mother goes to find one of the
nurses. Is that all you have on you? his grandmother says.
Hm? says Connell.
Is that jumper all you have on you?
Oh, he says. Yeah.
Youll freeze. Youll be in here yourself.
His grandmother slipped in the Aldi car park this morning and fell on
her hip. Shes not old like some of the other patients, shes only fifty-eight.
The same age as Mariannes mother, Connell thinks. Anyway, it looks like
his grandmothers hip is kind of messed up now and possibly broken, and
Connell had to drive Lorraine into Sligo town to visit the hospital. In the
bed across the ward someone is coughing.
Im alright, he says. Its warm out.
His grandmother sighs, like his commentary on the weather is painful to
her. It probably is, because everything he does is painful to her, because she
hates him for being alive. She looks him up and down with a critical
expression.
Well, you certainly dont take after your mother, do you? she says.
Yeah, he says. No.
Physically Lorraine and Connell are different types. Lorraine is blonde
and has a soft face without edges. The guys in school think shes attractive,
which they tell Connell often. She probably is attractive, so what, it doesnt
offend him. Connell has darker hair and a hard-looking face, like an artists
impression of a criminal. He knows, however, that his grandmothers point
is unrelated to his physical appearance and is meant as a remark on his
paternity. So, okay, he has nothing to say on that.
No one except Lorraine knows who Connells father is. She says he can
ask any time he wants to know, but he really doesnt care to. On nights out
his friends sometimes raise the subject of his father, like its something
deep and meaningful they can only talk about when theyre drunk. Connell
finds this depressing. He never thinks about the man who got Lorraine
pregnant, why would he? His friends seem so obsessed with their own
fathers, obsessed with emulating them or being different from them in
specific ways. When they fight with their fathers, the fights always seem to
mean one thing on the surface but conceal another secret meaning beneath.
When Connell fights with Lorraine, its usually about something like
leaving a wet towel on the couch, and thats it, its really about the towel, or
at most its about whether Connell is fundamentally careless in his
tendencies, because he wants Lorraine to see him as a responsible person
despite his habit of leaving towels everywhere, and Lorraine says if it was
so important to him to be seen as responsible, he would show it in his
actions, that kind of thing.
He drove Lorraine to the polling station to vote at the end of February,
and on the way she asked who he was going to vote for. One of the
independent candidates, he said vaguely. She laughed. Dont tell me, she
said. The communist Declan Bree. Connell, unprovoked, continued
watching the road. We could do with a bit more communism in this country
if you ask me, he said. From the corner of his eye he could see Lorraine
smiling. Come on now, comrade, she said. I was the one who raised you
with your good socialist values, remember? Its true Lorraine has values.
Shes interested in Cuba, and the cause of Palestinian liberation. In the end
Connell did vote for Declan Bree, who went on to be eliminated in the fifth
count. Two of the seats went to Fine Gael and the other to Sinn Fin.
Lorraine said it was a disgrace. Swapping one crowd of criminals for
another, she said. He texted Marianne: fg in government, fucks sake. She
texted back: The party of Franco. He had to look up what that meant.
The other night Marianne told him that she thought hed turned out well
as a person. She said he was nice, and that everyone liked him. He found
himself thinking about that a lot. It was a pleasant thing to have in his
thoughts. Youre a nice person and everyone likes you. To test himself he
would try not thinking about it for a bit, and then go back and think about it
again to see if it still made him feel good, and it did. For some reason he
wished he could tell Lorraine what shed said. He felt it would reassure her
somehow, but about what? That her only son was not a worthless person
after all? That she hadnt wasted her life?
And I hear youre off to Trinity College, his grandmother says.
Yeah, if I get the points.
What put Trinity into your head?
He shrugs. She laughs, but its like a scoffing laugh. Oh, good enough
for you, she says. What are you going to study?
Connell resists the impulse to take his phone from his pocket and check
the time. English, he says. His aunts and uncles are all very impressed with
his decision to put Trinity as his first choice, which embarrasses him. Hell
qualify for the full maintenance grant if he does get in, but even at that hell
have to work full-time over the summer and at least part-time during term.
Lorraine says she doesnt want him having to work too much through
college, she wants him to focus on his degree. That makes him feel bad,
because its not like English is a real degree you can get a job out of, its
just a joke, and then he thinks he probably should have applied for Law
after all.
Lorraine comes back into the ward now. Her shoes make a flat, clapping
noise on the tiles. She starts to talk to his grandmother about the consultant
whos on leave and about Dr OMalley and the X-ray. She relays all this
information very carefully, writing down the most important things on a
piece of notepaper. Finally, after his grandmother kisses his face, they leave
the ward. He disinfects his hands in the corridor while Lorraine waits. Then
they go down the stairs and out of the hospital, into the bright, clammy
sunshine.
*
After the fundraiser the other night, Marianne told him this thing about her
family. He didnt know what to say. He started telling her that he loved her.
It just happened, like drawing your hand back when you touch something
hot. She was crying and everything, and he just said it without thinking.
Was it true? He didnt know enough to know that. At first he thought it
must have been true, since he said it, and why would he lie? But then he
remembered he does lie sometimes, without planning to or knowing why. It
wasnt the first time hed had the urge to tell Marianne that he loved her,
whether or not it was true, but it was the first time hed given in and said it.
He noticed how long it took her to say anything in response, and how her
pause had bothered him, as if she might not say it back, and when she did
say it he felt better, but maybe that meant nothing. Connell wished he knew
how other people conducted their private lives, so that he could copy from
example.
The next morning they woke up to the sound of Lorraines keys in the
door. It was bright outside, his mouth was dry, and Marianne was sitting up
and pulling her clothes on. All she said was: Sorry, Im sorry. They must
have fallen asleep without meaning to. He had been planning to drop her
home the night before. She put her shoes on and he got dressed too.
Lorraine was standing in the hallway with two plastic bags of groceries
when they reached the stairs. Marianne was wearing her dress from the
night before, the black one with the straps.
Hello, sweetheart, said Lorraine.
Mariannes face looked bright like a light bulb. Sorry to intrude, she
said.
Connell didnt touch her or speak to her. His chest hurt. She walked out
the front door saying: Bye, sorry, thanks, sorry again. She shut the door
behind her before he was even down the stairs.
Lorraine pressed her lips together like she was trying not to laugh. You
can help me with the groceries, she said. She handed him one of the bags.
He followed her into the kitchen and put the bag down on the table without
looking at it. Rubbing his neck, he watched her unwrapping and putting
away the items.
Whats so funny? he said.
Theres no need for her to run off like that just because Im home, said
Lorraine. Im only delighted to see her, you know Im very fond of
Marianne.
He watched his mother fold away the reusable plastic bag.
Did you think I didnt know? she said.
He closed his eyes for a few seconds and then opened them again. He
shrugged.
Well, I knew someone was coming over here in the afternoons, said
Lorraine. And I do work in her house, you know.
He nodded, unable to speak.
You must really like her, said Lorraine.
Why do you say that?
Isnt that why youre going to Trinity?
He put his face in his hands. Lorraine was laughing then, he could hear
her. Youre making me not want to go there now, he said.
Oh, stop that.
He looked in the grocery bag he had left on the table and removed a
packet of dried spaghetti. Self-consciously he brought it over to the press
beside the fridge and put it with the other pasta.
So is Marianne your girlfriend, then? said Lorraine.
No.
What does that mean? Youre having sex with her but shes not your
girlfriend?
Youre prying into my life now, he said. I dont like that, its not your
business.
He returned to the bag and removed a carton of eggs, which he placed
on the countertop beside the sunflower oil.
Is it because of her mother? said Lorraine. You think shed frown on
you?
What?
Because she might, you know.
Frown on me? said Connell. Thats insane, what have I ever done?
I think she might consider us a little bit beneath her station.
He stared at his mother across the kitchen while she put a box of ownbrand
cornflakes into the press. The idea that Mariannes family considered
themselves superior to himself and Lorraine, too good to be associated with
them, had never occurred to him before. He found, to his surprise, that the
idea made him furious.
What, she thinks were not good enough for them? he said.
I dont know. We might find out.
She doesnt mind you cleaning their house but she doesnt want your
son hanging around with her daughter? What an absolute joke. Thats like
something from nineteenth-century times, Im actually laughing at that.
You dont sound like youre laughing, said Lorraine.
Believe me, I am. Its hilarious to me.
Lorraine closed the press and turned to look at him curiously.
Whats all the secrecy about, then? she said. If not for Denise Sheridans
sake. Does Marianne have a boyfriend or something, and you dont want
him to find out?
Youre getting so intrusive with these questions.
So she does have a boyfriend, then.
No, he said. But thats the last question Im answering from you.
Lorraines eyebrows moved around but she said nothing. He crumpled
up the empty plastic bag on the table and then paused there with the bag
screwed up in his hand.
Youre hardly going to tell anyone, are you? he said.
This is starting to sound very shady. Why shouldnt I tell anyone?
Feeling quite hard-hearted, he replied: Because there would be no
benefit to you, and a lot of annoyance for me. He thought for a moment and
added shrewdly: And Marianne.
Oh god, said Lorraine. I dont even think I want to know.
He continued waiting, feeling that she hadnt quite unambiguously
promised not to tell anyone, and she threw her hands up in exasperation
and said: I have more interesting things to gossip about than your sex life,
okay? Dont worry.
He went upstairs then and sat on his bed. He didnt know how much
time passed while he sat there like that. He was thinking about Mariannes
family, about the idea that she was too good for him, and also about what
she had told him the night before. Hed heard from guys in school that
sometimes girls made up stories about themselves for attention, saying bad
things had happened to them and stuff like that. And it was a pretty
attention-grabbing story Marianne had told him, about her dad beating her
up when she was a small child. Also, the dad was dead now, so he wasnt
around to defend himself. Connell could see it was possible that Marianne
had just lied to get his sympathy, but he also knew, as clearly as he knew
anything, that she hadnt. If anything he felt like shed been holding back
on telling him how bad it really was. It gave him a queasy feeling, to have
this information about her, to be tied to her in this way.
That was yesterday. This morning he was early to school, as usual, and
Rob and Eric started fake-cheering when he came to put his books in his
locker. He dumped his bag on the floor, ignoring them. Eric slung an arm
around his shoulder and said: Go on, tell us. Did you get the ride the other
night? Connell felt in his pocket for his locker key and shrugged off Erics
arm. Funny, he said.
I heard you looked very cosy heading off together, said Rob.
Did anything happen? Eric said. Be honest.
No, obviously, said Connell.
Why is that obvious? Rachel said. Everyone knows she fancies you.
Rachel was sitting up on the windowsill with her legs swinging slowly
back and forth, long and inky-black in opaque tights. Connell didnt meet
her eye. Lisa was sitting on the floor against the lockers, finishing
homework. Karen wasnt in yet. He wished Karen would come in.
I bet he did get a cheeky ride, said Rob. Hed never tell us anyway.
I wouldnt hold it against you, Eric said, shes not a bad-looking girl
when she makes an effort.
Yeah, shes just mentally deranged, said Rachel.
Connell pretended to look for something in his locker. A thin white
sweat had broken out on his hands and under his collar.
Youre all being nasty, said Lisa. What has she ever done to any of you?
The question is what shes done to Waldron, said Eric. Look at him
hiding in his locker there. Come on, spit it out. Did you shift her?
No, he said.
Well, I feel sorry for her, said Lisa.
Me too, said Eric. I think you should make it up to her, Connell. I think
you should ask her to the Debs.
They all erupted in laughter. Connell closed his locker and walked out
of the room carrying his schoolbag limply in his right hand. He heard the
others calling after him, but he didnt turn around. When he got to the
bathroom he locked himself in a cubicle. The yellow walls bore down on
him and his face was slick with sweat. He kept thinking of himself saying
to Marianne in bed: I love you. It was terrifying, like watching himself
committing a terrible crime on CCTV. And soon she would be in school,
putting her books in her bag, smiling to herself, never knowing anything.
Youre a nice person and everyone likes you. He took one deep
uncomfortable breath and then threw up.
*
He indicates left coming out of the hospital to get back on the N16. A pain
has settled behind his eyes. They drive along the Mall with banks of dark
trees flanking them on either side.
Are you alright? says Lorraine.
Yeah.
Youve got a look on you.
He breathes in, so his seatbelt digs into his ribs a little bit, and then
exhales.
I asked Rachel to the Debs, he says.
What?
I asked Rachel Moran to go to the Debs with me.
Theyre about to pass a garage and Lorraine taps the window quickly
and says: Pull in here. Connell looks over, confused. What? he says. She
taps the window again, harder, and her nails click on the glass. Pull in, she
says again. He hits the indicator quickly, checks the mirror, and then pulls
in and stops the car. By the side of the garage someone is hosing down a
van, water running off in dark rivers.
Do you want something from the shop? he says.
Who is Marianne going to the Debs with?
Connell squeezes the steering wheel absently. I dont know, he says.
You hardly made me park here just to have a discussion, did you?
So maybe no one will ask her, says Lorraine. And she just wont go.
Yeah, maybe. I dont know.
On the walk back from lunch today he hung back behind the others. He
knew Rachel would see him and wait with him, he knew that. And when
she did, he screwed his eyes almost shut so the world was a whitish-grey
colour and said: Here, do you have a date to the Debs yet? She said no. He
asked if she wanted to go with him. Alright then, she said. I have to say, I
was hoping for something a bit more romantic. He didnt reply to that,
because he felt as if he had just jumped off a high precipice and fallen to
his death, and he was glad he was dead, he never wanted to be alive again.
Does Marianne know youre taking someone else? says Lorraine.
Not as of yet. I will tell her.
Lorraine covers her mouth with her hand, so he cant make out her
expression: she might be surprised, or concerned, or she might be about to
get sick.
And you dont think maybe you should have asked her? she says.
Seeing as how you fuck her every day after school.
That is vile language to use.
Lorraines nostrils flare white when she inhales. How would you like
me to put it? she says. I suppose I should say youve been using her for sex,
is that more accurate?
Would you relax for a second? No one is using anyone.
How did you get her to keep quiet about it? Did you tell her something
bad would happen if she told on you?
Jesus, he says. Obviously not. It was agreed, okay? Youre getting it
way out of proportion now.
Lorraine nods to herself, staring out the windshield. Nervously he waits
for her to say something.
People in school dont like her, do they? says Lorraine. So I suppose
you were afraid of what they would say about you, if they found out.
He doesnt respond.
Well, Ill tell what I have to say about you, Lorraine says. I think youre
a disgrace. Im ashamed of you.
He wipes his forehead with his sleeve. Lorraine, he says.
She opens the passenger door.
Where are you going? he says.
Ill get the bus home.
What are you talking about? Act normal, will you?
If I stay in the car, Im only going to say things Ill regret.
What is this? he says. Why do you care if I go with someone or I dont,
anyway? Its nothing to do with you.
She pushes the door wide and climbs out of the car. Youre being so
weird, he says. In response she slams the door shut, hard. He tightens his
hands painfully on the steering wheel but stays quiet. Its my fucking car!
he could say. Did I say you could slam the door, did I? Lorraine is walking
away already, her handbag knocking against her hip with the pace of her
stride. He watches her until she turns the corner. Two and a half years he
worked in the garage after school to buy this car, and all he uses it for is
driving his mother around because she doesnt have a licence. He could go
after her now, roll the window down, shout at her to get back in. He almost
feels like doing it, though shed only ignore him. Instead he sits in the
drivers seat, head tipped back against the headrest, listening to his own
idiotic breathing. A crow on the forecourt picks at a discarded crisp packet.
A family comes out of the shop holding ice creams. The smell of petrol
infiltrates the car interior, heavy like a headache. He starts the engine.
Four Months Later
(AUGUST 2011)
Shes in the garden, wearing sunglasses. The weather has been fine for a
few days now, and her arms are getting freckled. She hears the back door
open but doesnt move. Alans voice calls from the patio: Annie Kearneys
after getting five-seventy! Marianne doesnt respond. She feels in the grass
beside her chair for the sun lotion, and when she sits up to apply it, she
notices that Alan is on the phone.
Someone in your year got six hundred, hey! he yells.
She pours a little lotion into the palm of her left hand.
Marianne! Alan says. Someone got six A1s, I said!
She nods. She smooths the lotion slowly over her right arm, so it
glistens. Alan is trying to find out who got six hundred points. Marianne
knows right away who it must be, but she says nothing. She applies some
lotion to her left arm and then, quietly, lies back down in the deckchair,
face to the sun, and closes her eyes. Behind her eyelids waves of light
move in green and red.
She hasnt eaten breakfast or lunch today, except two cups of sweetened
coffee with milk. Her appetite is small this summer. When she wakes up in
the morning she opens her laptop on the opposite pillow and waits for her
eyes to adjust to the rectangle glow of the screen so she can read the news.
She reads long articles about Syria and then researches the ideological
backgrounds of the journalists who have written them. She reads long
articles about the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and zooms in to see the
small print on the graphs. After that she usually either goes back to sleep or
gets in the shower, or maybe lies down and makes herself come. The rest of
the day follows a similar pattern, with minor variations: maybe she opens
her curtains, maybe not; maybe breakfast, or maybe just coffee, which she
takes upstairs to her room so she doesnt have to see her family. This
morning was different, of course.
Here, Marianne, says Alan. Its Waldron! Connell Waldron got six
hundred points!
She doesnt move. Into the phone Alan says: No, she only got fiveninety.
Id say shes raging now someone did better than her. Are you
raging, Marianne? She hears him but says nothing. Under the lenses of her
sunglasses her eyelids feel greasy. An insect whirrs past her ear and away.
Is Waldron there with you, is he? says Alan. Put him on to me.
Why are you calling him Waldron like hes your friend? Marianne
says. You hardly know him.
Alan looks up from the phone, smirking. I know him well, he says. I
saw him at Erics gaff there the last day.
She regrets speaking. Alan is pacing up and down the patio, she can
hear the gritty sound of his footsteps as he comes down towards the grass.
Someone on the other end of the line starts talking, and Alan breaks into a
bright, strained-looking smile. How are you now? he says. Fair play,
congratulations. Connells voice is quiet, so Marianne cant hear it. Alan is
still smiling the effortful smile. He always gets like this around other
people, cringing and sycophantic.
Yeah, Alan says. She did well, yeah. Not as well as yourself! Fiveninety
she got. Do you want me to put her on to you?
Marianne looks up. Alan is joking. He thinks Connell will say no. He
cant think of any reason why Connell would want to speak to Marianne, a
friendless loser, on the phone; particularly not on this special day. Instead
he says yes. Alans smile falters. Yeah, he says, no bother. He holds the
phone out for Marianne to take it. Marianne shakes her head. Alans eyes
widen. He jerks his hand towards her. Here, he says. He wants to talk to
you. She shakes her head again. Alan prods the phone into her chest now,
roughly. Hes on the phone for you, Marianne, says Alan.
I dont want to speak to him, says Marianne.
Alans face takes on a wild expression of fury, with the whites of his
eyes showing all around. He jabs the phone harder into her sternum,
hurting her. Say hello, he says. She can hear Connells voice buzzing in the
receiver. The sun glares down onto her face. She takes the phone from
Alans hand and, with a swipe of her finger, hangs up the call. Alan stands
over the deckchair staring. There is no sound in the garden for a few
seconds. Then, in a low voice, he says: What the fuck did you do that for?
I didnt want to speak to him, she says. I told you.
He wanted to speak to you.
Yes, I know he did.
Its unusually bright today, and Alans shadow on the grass has a vivid,
stark quality. Shes still holding out the phone, loose in the palm of her
hand, waiting for her brother to accept it.
*
In April, Connell told her he was taking Rachel Moran to the Debs.
Marianne was sitting on the side of his bed at the time, acting very cold and
humorous, which made him awkward. He told her it wasnt romantic, and
that he and Rachel were just friends.
You mean like were just friends, said Marianne.
Well, no, he said. Different.
But are you sleeping with her?
No. When would I even have time?
Do you want to? said Marianne.
Im not hugely gone on the idea. I dont feel like Im that insatiable
really, I do already have you.
Marianne stared down at her fingernails.
That was a joke, Connell said.
I dont get what the joke part was.
I know youre pissed off with me.
I dont really care, she said. I just think if you want to sleep with her
you should tell me.
Yeah, and I will tell you, if I ever want to do that. Youre saying thats
what the issue is, but I honestly dont think thats what it is.
Marianne snapped: What is it, then? He just stared at her. She went back
to looking at her fingernails, flushed. He didnt say anything. Eventually
she laughed, because she wasnt totally without spirit, and it obviously was
kind of funny, just how savagely he had humiliated her, and his inability to
apologise or even admit he had done it. She went home then and straight to
bed, where she slept for thirteen hours without waking.
The next morning she quit school. It wasnt possible to go back,
however she looked at it. No one else would invite her to the Debs, that
was clear. She had organised the fundraisers, she had booked the venue, but
she wouldnt be able to attend the event. Everyone would know that, and
some of them would be glad, and even the most sympathetic ones could
only feel a terrible second-hand embarrassment. Instead she stayed home in
her room all day with the curtains closed, studying and sleeping at strange
hours. Her mother was furious. Doors were slammed. On two separate
occasions Mariannes dinner was scraped into the bin. Still, she was an
adult woman, and no one could make her dress up in a uniform anymore
and submit to being stared at or whispered about.
A week after she left school she walked into the kitchen and saw
Lorraine kneeling on the floor to clean the oven. Lorraine straightened up
slightly, and wiped her forehead with the part of her wrist exposed above
her rubber glove. Marianne swallowed.
Hello, sweetheart, Lorraine said. I hear youve been out of school for a
few days. Is everything okay?
Yeah, Im fine, said Marianne. Actually Im not going back to school. I
find I get more done if I just stay at home and study.
Lorraine nodded and said: Suit yourself. Then she went back to
scrubbing the inside of the oven. Marianne opened the fridge to look for the
orange juice.
My son tells me youre ignoring his phone calls, Lorraine added.
Marianne paused, and the silence in the kitchen was loud in her ears,
like the white noise of rushing water. Yes, she said. I am, I suppose.
Good for you, said Lorraine. He doesnt deserve you.
Marianne felt a relief so high and sudden that it was almost like panic.
She put the orange juice on the counter and closed the fridge.
Lorraine, she said, can you ask him not to come over here anymore?
Like if he has to collect you or anything, is it okay if he doesnt come in the
house?
Oh, hes permanently barred as far as Im concerned. You dont need to
worry about that. I have half a mind to kick him out of my own house.
Marianne smiled, feeling awkward. He didnt do anything that bad, she
said. I mean, compared to the other people in school he was actually pretty
nice, to be honest.
At this Lorraine stood up and stripped off her gloves. Without speaking,
she put her arms around Marianne and embraced her very tightly. In a
strange, cramped voice Marianne said: Its okay. Im fine. Dont worry
about me.
It was true what she had said about Connell. He didnt do anything that
bad. He had never tried to delude her into thinking she was socially
acceptable; shed deluded herself. He had just been using her as a kind of
private experiment, and her willingness to be used had probably shocked
him. He pitied her in the end, but she also repulsed him. In a way she feels
sorry for him now, because he has to live with the fact that he had sex with
her, of his own free choice, and he liked it. That says more about him, the
supposedly ordinary and healthy person, than it does about her. She never
went back to school again except to sit the exams. By then people were
saying she had been in the mental hospital. None of that mattered now
anyway.
*
Are you angry he did better than you? says her brother.
Marianne laughs. And why shouldnt she laugh? Her life here in
Carricklea is over, and either a new life will begin, or it wont. Soon she
will be packing things into suitcases: woollen jumpers, skirts, her two silk
dresses. A set of teacups and saucers patterned with flowers. A hairdryer, a
frying pan, four white cotton towels. A coffee pot. The objects of a new
existence.
No, she says.
Why wouldnt you say hello to him, then?
Ask him. If youre such good friends with him, you should ask him. He
knows.
Alan makes a fist with his left hand. It doesnt matter, its over. Lately
Marianne walks around Carricklea and thinks how beautiful it is in sunny
weather, white clouds like chalk dust over the library, long avenues lined
with trees. The arc of a tennis ball through blue air. Cars slowing at traffic
lights with their windows rolled down, music bleating from the speakers.
Marianne wonders what it would be like to belong here, to walk down the
street greeting people and smiling. To feel that life was happening here, in
this place, and not somewhere else far away.
What does that mean? says Alan.
Ask Connell Waldron why were not speaking anymore. Call him back
now if you want to, Id be interested to hear what he has to say.
Alan bites down on the knuckle of his index finger. His arm is shaking.
In just a few weeks time Marianne will live with different people, and life
will be different. But she herself will not be different. Shell be the same
person, trapped inside her own body. Theres nowhere she can go that
would free her from this. A different place, different people, what does that
matter? Alan releases his knuckle from his mouth.
Like he fucking cares, says Alan. Im surprised he even knows your
name.
Oh, we used to be quite close actually. You can ask him about that too,
if you want. Might make you a bit uncomfortable, though.
Before Alan can respond, they hear someone calling out from inside the
house, and a door closing. Their mother is home. Alan looks up, his
expression changes, and Marianne feels her own face moving around
involuntarily. He glances down at her. You shouldnt tell lies about people,
he says. Marianne nods, says nothing. Dont tell Mam about this, he says.
Marianne shakes her head. No, she agrees. But it wouldnt matter if she did
tell her, not really. Denise decided a long time ago that it is acceptable for
men to use aggression towards Marianne as a way of expressing
themselves. As a child Marianne resisted, but now she simply detaches, as
if it isnt of any interest to her, which in a way it isnt. Denise considers this
a symptom of her daughters frigid and unlovable personality. She believes
Marianne lacks warmth, by which she means the ability to beg for love
from people who hate her. Alan goes back inside now. Marianne hears the
patio door slide shut.
Three Months Later
(NOVEMBER 2011)
Connell doesnt know anyone at the party. The person who invited him
isnt the same person who answered the door and, with an indifferent shrug,
let him inside. He still hasnt seen the person who invited him, a person
called Gareth, whos in his Critical Theory seminar. Connell knew going to
a party on his own would be a bad idea, but on the phone Lorraine said it
would be a good idea. I wont know anyone, he told her. And she said
patiently: You wont get to know anyone if you dont go out and meet
people. Now hes here, standing on his own in a crowded room not
knowing whether to take his jacket off. It feels practically scandalous to be
lingering here in solitude. He feels as if everyone around him is disturbed
by his presence, and trying not to stare.
Finally, just as he decides to leave, Gareth comes in. Connells intense
relief at seeing Gareth triggers another wave of self-loathing, since he
doesnt even know Gareth very well or particularly like him. Gareth puts
his hand out and desperately, bizarrely, Connell finds himself shaking it.
Its a low moment in his adult life. People are watching them shake hands,
Connell is certain of this. Good to see you, man, says Gareth. Good to see
you. I like the backpack, very nineties. Connell is wearing a completely
plain navy backpack with no features to distinguish it from any of the other
numerous backpacks at the party.
Uh, he says. Yeah, thanks.
Gareth is one of these popular people whos involved in college
societies. He went to one of the big private schools in Dublin and people
are always greeting him on campus, like: Hey, Gareth! Gareth, hey! Theyll
greet him from all the way across Front Square, just to get him to wave
hello. Connell has seen it. People used to like me, he feels like saying as a
joke. I used to be on my school football team. No one would laugh at that
joke here.
Can I get you a drink? says Gareth.
Connell has a six-pack of cider with him, but hes reluctant to do
anything that would draw attention to his backpack, in case Gareth might
feel prompted to comment on it further. Cheers, he says. Gareth navigates
over to the table at the side of the room and returns with a bottle of Corona.
This okay? says Gareth. Connell looks at him for a second, wondering if
the question is ironic or genuinely servile. Unable to decide, Connell says:
Yeah, itll do, thanks. People in college are like this, unpleasantly smug one
minute and then abasing themselves to show off their good manners the
next. He sips the beer while Gareth watches him. Without any apparent
sarcasm Gareth grins and says: Enjoy.
This is what its like in Dublin. All Connells classmates have identical
accents and carry the same size MacBook under their arms. In seminars
they express their opinions passionately and conduct impromptu debates.
Unable to form such straightforward views or express them with any force,
Connell initially felt a sense of crushing inferiority to his fellow students,
as if he had upgraded himself accidentally to an intellectual level far above
his own, where he had to strain to make sense of the most basic premises.
He did gradually start to wonder why all their classroom discussions were
so abstract and lacking in textual detail, and eventually he realised that
most people were not actually doing the reading. They were coming into
college every day to have heated debates about books they had not read. He
understands now that his classmates are not like him. Its easy for them to
have opinions, and to express them with confidence. They dont worry
about appearing ignorant or conceited. They are not stupid people, but
theyre not so much smarter than him either. They just move through the
world in a different way, and hell probably never really understand them,
and he knows they will never understand him, or even try.
He only has a few classes every week anyway, so he fills the rest of the
time by reading. In the evenings he stays late in the library, reading
assigned texts, novels, works of literary criticism. Not having friends to eat
with, he reads over lunch. At the weekends when theres football on, he
checks the team news and then goes back to reading instead of watching
the build-up. One night the library started closing just as he reached the
passage in Emma when it seems like Mr Knightley is going to marry
Harriet, and he had to close the book and walk home in a state of strange
emotional agitation. Hes amused at himself, getting wrapped up in the
drama of novels like that. It feels intellectually unserious to concern
himself with fictional people marrying one another. But there it is:
literature moves him. One of his professors calls it the pleasure of being
touched by great art. In those words it almost sounds sexual. And in a way,
the feeling provoked in Connell when Mr Knightley kisses Emmas hand is
not completely asexual, though its relation to sexuality is indirect. It
suggests to Connell that the same imagination he uses as a reader is
necessary to understand real people also, and to be intimate with them.
Youre not from Dublin, are you? says Gareth.
No. Sligo.
Oh yeah? My girlfriends from Sligo.
Connell isnt sure what Gareth expects him to say to this.
Oh, he replies weakly. Well, there you go.
People in Dublin often mention the west of Ireland in this strange tone
of voice, as if its a foreign country, but one they consider themselves very
knowledgeable about. In the Workmans the other night, Connell told a girl
he was from Sligo and she made a funny face and said: Yeah, you look like
it. Increasingly it seems as if Connell is actually drawn towards this
supercilious type of person. Sometimes on a night out, among a crowd of
smiling women in tight dresses and perfectly applied lipstick, his flatmate
Niall will point out one person and say: I bet you think shes attractive. And
it will always be some flat-chested girl wearing ugly shoes and disdainfully
smoking a cigarette. And Connell has to admit, yes, he does find her
attractive, and he may even try to talk to her, and he will go home feeling
even worse than before.
Awkwardly he looks around the room and says: You live here, do you?
Yeah, says Gareth. Not bad for campus accommodation, is it?
No, yeah. Its really nice actually.
Whereabouts are you living yourself?
Connell tells him. Its a flat near college, just off Brunswick Place. He
and Niall have one box room between them, with two single beds pushed
up against opposite walls. They share a kitchen with two Portuguese
students who are never home. The flat has some problems with damp and
often gets so cold at night that Connell can see his own breath in the dark,
but Niall is a decent person at least. Hes from Belfast, and he also thinks
people in Trinity are weird, which is reassuring. Connell half-knows some
of Nialls friends by now, and hes acquainted with most of his own
classmates, but no one he would have a proper conversation with.
Back home, Connells shyness never seemed like much of an obstacle to
his social life, because everyone knew who he was already, and there was
never any need to introduce himself or create impressions about his
personality. If anything, his personality seemed like something external to
himself, managed by the opinions of others, rather than anything he
individually did or produced. Now he has a sense of invisibility,
nothingness, with no reputation to recommend him to anyone. Though his
physical appearance has not changed, he feels objectively worse-looking
than he used to be. He has become self-conscious about his clothes. All the
guys in his class wear the same waxed hunting jackets and plum-coloured
chinos, not that Connell has a problem with people dressing how they want,
but he would feel like a complete prick wearing that stuff. At the same
time, it forces him to acknowledge that his own clothes are cheap and
unfashionable. His only shoes are an ancient pair of Adidas trainers, which
he wears everywhere, even to the gym.
He still goes home at the weekends, because he works in the garage
Saturday afternoons and Sunday mornings. Most people from school have
left town now, for college or for work. Karen is living down in Castlebar
with her sister, Connell hasnt seen her since the Leaving Cert. Rob and
Eric are both studying Business in Galway and never seem to be in town.
Some weekends Connell doesnt see anyone from school at all. He sits at
home in the evening watching television with his mother. Whats it like
living on your own? he asked her last week. She smiled. Oh, its fantastic,
she said. No one leaving towels on the couch. No dirty dishes in the sink,
its great. He nodded, humourless. She gave him a playful little shove.
What do you want me to say? she says. Im crying myself to sleep at night?
He rolled his eyes. Obviously not, he muttered. She told him she was glad
he had moved away, she thought it would be good for him. Whats good
about moving away? he said. Youve lived here all your life and you turned
out fine. She gawked at him. Oh, and youre planning to bury me here, are
you? she said. Jesus, Im only thirty-five. He tried not to smile, but he did
find it funny. I could move away tomorrow, thanks very much, she added.
It would save me looking at your miserable face every weekend. He had to
laugh then, he couldnt help it.
Gareth is saying something Connell cant hear now. Watch the Throne is
playing very loudly over a tinny pair of speakers. Connell leans forward a
little, towards Gareth, and says: What?
My girlfriend, you should meet her, says Gareth. Ill introduce you.
Glad of a break in the conversation, Connell follows Gareth out the
main door and onto the front steps. The building faces the tennis courts,
which are locked now for the night and look eerily cool in the emptiness,
reddish under the street lights. Down the steps some people are smoking
and talking.
Hey, Marianne, says Gareth.
She looks up from her cigarette, mid-sentence. Shes wearing a
corduroy jacket over a dress, and her hair is pinned back. Her hand, holding
the cigarette, looks long and ethereal in the light.
Oh, right, says Connell. Hi.
Instantly, unbelievably, Mariannes face breaks into a gigantic smile,
exposing her crooked front teeth. Shes wearing lipstick. Everyone is
watching her now. She had been speaking, but shes stopped to stare at him.
Jesus Christ, she says. Connell Waldron! From beyond the grave.
He coughs and, in a panic to appear normal, says: When did you take up
smoking?
To Gareth, to her friends, she adds: We went to school together. Fixing
her gaze on Connell again, looking radiantly pleased, she says: Well, how
are you? He shrugs and mumbles: Yeah, alright, good. She looks at him as
if her eyes have a message in them. Would you like a drink? she says. He
holds up the bottle Gareth gave him. Ill get you a glass, she says. Come on
inside. She goes up the steps to him. Over her shoulder she says: Back in a
second. From this remark, and from the way she was standing on the steps,
he can tell that all these people at the party are her friends, she has a lot of
friends, and shes happy. Then the front door shuts behind them and theyre
in the hallway, alone.
He follows her to the kitchen, which is empty and hygienically quiet.
Matching teal surfaces and labelled appliances. The closed window reflects
the lighted interior, blue and white. He doesnt need a glass but she takes
one from the cupboard and he doesnt protest. Taking her jacket off, she
asks him how he knows Gareth. Connell says they have classes together.
She hangs her jacket on the back of a chair. Shes wearing a longish grey
dress, in which her body looks narrow and delicate.
Everyone seems to know him, she says. Hes extroverted.
Hes one of these campus celebrities, says Connell.
That makes her laugh, and its like everything is fine between them, like
they live in a slightly different universe where nothing bad has happened
but Marianne suddenly has a cool boyfriend and Connell is the lonely,
unpopular one.
Hed love that, says Marianne.
He seems to be on a lot of like, committees for things.
She smiles, she squints up at him. Her lipstick is very dark, a wine
colour, and shes wearing make-up on her eyes.
Ive missed you, she says.
This directness, coming so soon and so unexpectedly, makes him blush.
He starts pouring the beer into the glass to divert his attention.
Yeah, you too, he says. I was kind of worried when you left school and
all that. You know, I was pretty down about it.
Well, we never hung out much during school hours.
No. Yeah. Obviously.
And what about you and Rachel? says Marianne. Are you still together?
No, we broke up there during the summer.
In a voice just false enough to sound nearly sincere, Marianne says: Oh.
Im sorry.
*
After Marianne left school in April, Connell entered a period of low spirits.
Teachers spoke to him about it. The guidance counsellor told Lorraine she
was concerned. People in school were probably talking about it too, he
didnt know. He couldnt summon up the energy to act normal. At lunch he
sat in the same place as always, eating sad mouthfuls of food, not listening
to his friends when they spoke. Sometimes he wouldnt notice even when
they called his name, and they would have to throw something at him or
clip him on the head to get his attention. Everyone must have known there
was something wrong with him. He felt a debilitating shame about the kind
of person hed turned out to be, and he missed the way Marianne had made
him feel, and he missed her company. He called her phone all the time, he
sent her text messages every day, but she never replied. His mother said he
was barred from visiting her house, though he didnt think he would have
tried that anyway.
For a while he tried to get over it by drinking too much and having
anxious, upsetting sex with other girls. At a house party in May he slept
with Barry Kennys sister Sinead, who was twenty-three and had a degree
in Speech and Language Therapy. Afterwards he felt so bad he threw up,
and he had to tell Sinead he was drunk even though he wasnt really. There
was no one he could talk to about that. He was excruciatingly lonely. He
had recurring dreams about being with Marianne again, holding her
peacefully the way he used to when they were tired, and speaking with her
in low voices. Then hed remember what had happened, and wake up
feeling so depressed he couldnt move a single muscle in his body.
One night in June he came home drunk and asked Lorraine if she saw
Marianne much at work.
Sometimes, said Lorraine. Why?
And is she alright, or what?
Ive already told you I think shes upset.
She wont reply to any of my texts or anything, he said. When I call her,
like if she sees its me, she wont pick up.
Because you hurt her feelings.
Yeah, but its kind of overreacting, isnt it?
Lorraine shrugged and looked back at the TV.
Do you think it is? he said.
Do I think what?
Do you think its overreacting, what shes doing?
Lorraine kept looking straight at the TV. Connell was drunk, he doesnt
remember what she was watching. Slowly she said: You know, Marianne is
a very vulnerable person. And you did something very exploitative there
and you hurt her. So maybe its good that youre feeling bad about it.
I didnt say I felt bad about it, he said.
He and Rachel started seeing each other in July. Everyone in school had
known she liked him, and she seemed to view the attachment between them
as a personal achievement on her part. As to the actual relationship, it
mostly took place before nights out, when she would put make-up on and
complain about her friends and Connell would sit around drinking cans.
Sometimes he looked at his phone while she was talking and she would
say: Youre not even listening. He hated the way he acted around her,
because she was right, he really didnt listen, but when he did, he didnt
like anything she actually said. He only had sex with her twice, neither time
enjoyable, and when they lay in bed together he felt a constricting pain in
his chest and throat that made it difficult to breathe. He had thought that
being with her would make him feel less lonely, but it only gave his
loneliness a new stubborn quality, like it was planted down inside him and
impossible to kill.
Eventually the night of the Debs came. Rachel wore an extravagantly
expensive dress and Connell stood in her front garden while her mother
took their photograph. Rachel kept mentioning that he was going to Trinity,
and her father showed him some golf clubs. Then they went to the hotel
and ate dinner. Everyone got very drunk and Lisa passed out before dessert.
Under the table Rob showed Eric and Connell naked photographs of Lisa
on his phone. Eric laughed and tapped parts of Lisas body on-screen with
his fingers. Connell sat there looking at the phone and then said quietly: Bit
fucked-up showing these to people, isnt it? With a loud sigh Rob locked
the phone and put it back in his pocket. Youve gotten awfully fucking gay
about things lately, he said.
At midnight, sloppy drunk but hypocritically disgusted by the
drunkenness of everyone around him, Connell wandered out of the
ballroom and down a corridor into the smoking garden. He had lit a
cigarette and was in the process of shredding some low-hanging leaves
from a nearby tree when the door slid open and Eric came out to join him.
Eric gave a knowing laugh on seeing him, and then sat on an upturned
flowerpot and lit a cigarette himself.
Shame Marianne didnt come in the end, Eric said.
Connell nodded, hating to hear her name mentioned and unwilling to
indulge it with a response.
What was going on there? said Eric.
Connell looked at him silently. A beam of white light was shining down
from the bulb above the door and illuminating Erics face with a ghostly
pallor.
What do you mean? said Connell.
With herself and yourself.
Connell hardly recognised his own voice when he said: I dont know
what youre talking about.
Eric grinned and his teeth glittered wetly in the light.
Do you think we dont know you were riding her? he said. Sure
everyone knows.
Connell paused and took another drag on his cigarette. This was
probably the most horrifying thing Eric could have said to him, not because
it ended his life, but because it didnt. He knew then that the secret for
which he had sacrificed his own happiness and the happiness of another
person had been trivial all along, and worthless. He and Marianne could
have walked down the school corridors hand in hand, and with what
consequence? Nothing really. No one cared.
Fair enough, said Connell.
How long was that going on for?
I dont know. A while.
And whats the story there? said Eric. You were just doing it for the
laugh, or what?
You know me.
He stubbed out his cigarette and went back inside to collect his jacket.
After that he left without saying goodbye to anyone, including Rachel, who
broke up with him shortly afterwards. That was it, people moved away, he
moved away. Their life in Carricklea, which they had imbued with such
drama and significance, just ended like that with no conclusion, and it
would never be picked back up again, never in the same way.
*
Yeah, well, he says to Marianne. I wasnt that compatible with Rachel, I
dont think.
Marianne smiles now, a coy little smile. Hm, she says.
What?
I probably could have told you that.
Yeah, you should have, he says. You werent really replying to my texts
at the time.
Well, I felt somewhat abandoned.
I felt a bit abandoned myself, didnt I? says Connell. You disappeared.
And I never had anything to do with Rachel until ages after that, by the
way. Not that it matters now or anything, but I didnt.
Marianne sighs and moves her head from side to side, ambivalently.
That wasnt really why I left school, she says.
Right. I suppose you were better off out of it.
It was more of a last-straw thing.
Yeah, he says. I wondered if that was what it was.
She smiles again, a lopsided smile like shes flirting. Really? she says.
Maybe youre telepathic.
I did used to think I could read your mind at times, Connell says.
In bed, you mean.
He takes a sip from his glass now. The beer is cold but the glass is room
temperature. Before this evening he didnt know how Marianne would act
if he ever met her in college, but now it seems inevitable, of course it
would be like this. Of course she would talk drolly about their sex life, like
its a cute joke between them and not awkward. And in a way he likes it, he
likes knowing how to act around her.
Yeah, Connell says. And afterwards. But maybe thats normal.
Its not.
They both smile, a half-repressed smile of amusement. Connell puts the
empty bottle on the countertop and looks at Marianne. She smooths down
her dress.
You look really well, he says.
I know. Its classic me, I came to college and got pretty.
He starts laughing. He doesnt even want to laugh but something about
the weird dynamic between them is making him do it. Classic me is a
very Marianne thing to say, a little self-mocking, and at the same time
gesturing to some mutual understanding between them, an understanding
that she is special. Her dress is cut low at the front, showing her pale
collarbones like two white hyphens.
You were always pretty, he says. I should know, Im a shallow guy.
Youre very pretty, youre beautiful.
Shes not laughing now. She makes a kind of funny expression with her
face and pushes her hair back off her forehead.
Oh well, she says. I havent heard that one in a while.
Does Gareth not tell you youre beautiful? Or hes too busy with like,
amateur drama or something.
Debating. And youre being very cruel.
Debating? says Connell. Jesus, dont tell me hes involved in this Nazi
thing, is he?
Mariannes lips become a thin line. Connell doesnt read the campus
papers much, but he has still managed to hear about the debating society
inviting a neo-Nazi to give a speech. Its all over social media. There was
even an article in The Irish Times. Connell hasnt commented on any of the
Facebook threads, but he has liked several comments calling for the invite
to be rescinded, which is probably the most strident political action he has
ever taken in his life.
Well, we dont see eye to eye on everything, she says.
Connell laughs, happy for some reason to find her being so
uncharacteristically weak and unscrupulous.
I thought I was bad going out with Rachel Moran, he says. Your
boyfriends a Holocaust denier.
Oh, hes just into free speech.
Yeah, thats good. Thank god for white moderates. As I believe Dr King
once wrote.
She laughs then, sincerely. Her little teeth flash again and she lifts a
hand to cover her mouth. He swallows some more of the drink and takes in
her sweet expression, which he has missed, and it feels like a nice scene
between them, although later on hell probably hate everything he said to
her. Okay, she says, weve both failed on ideological purity. Connell
considers saying: I hope hes really good in bed, Marianne. She would
definitely find it funny. For some reason, probably shyness, he doesnt say
it. She looks at him with narrowed eyes and says: Are you seeing anyone
problematic at the moment?
No, he says. Not even anyone good.
Marianne gives a curious smile. Finding it hard to meet people? she
says.
He shrugs and then, vaguely, nods his head. Bit different from home,
isnt it? he says.
I have some girlfriends I could introduce you to.
Oh yeah?
Yeah, I have those now, she says.
Not sure Id be their type.
They look at one another. Shes a little flushed, and her lipstick is
smudged just slightly on her lower lip. Her gaze unsettles him like it used
to, like looking into a mirror, seeing something that has no secrets from
you.
What does that mean? she says.
I dont know.
Whats not to like about you?
He smiles and looks into his glass. If Niall could see Marianne, he
would say: Dont tell me. You like her. Its true she is Connells type,
maybe even the originary model of the type: elegant, bored-looking, with
an impression of perfect self-assurance. And hes attracted to her, he can
admit that. After these months away from home, life seems much larger,
and his personal dramas less significant. Hes not the same anxious,
repressed person he was in school, when his attraction to her felt terrifying,
like an oncoming train, and he threw her under it. He knows shes acting
funny and coy because she wants to show him that shes not bitter. He
could say: Im really sorry for what I did to you, Marianne. He always
thought, if he did see her again, thats what he would say. Somehow she
doesnt seem to admit that possibility, or maybe hes being cowardly, or
both.
I dont know, he says. Good question, I dont know.
Three Months Later
(FEBRUARY 2012)
Marianne gets in the front seat of Connells car and closes the door. Her
hair is unwashed and she pulls her feet up onto the seat to tie her shoelaces.
She smells like fruit liqueur, not in a bad way but not in a fully good way
either. Connell gets in and starts the engine. She glances at him.
Is your seatbelt on? he says.
Hes looking in the rear-view mirror like its a normal day. Actually its
the morning after a house party in Swords and Connell wasnt drinking and
Marianne was, so nothing is normal. She puts her seatbelt on obediently, to
show that theyre still friends.
Sorry about last night, she says.
She tries to pronounce this in a way that communicates several things:
apology, painful embarrassment, some additional feigned embarrassment
that serves to ironise and dilute the painful kind, a sense that she knows she
will be forgiven or is already, a desire not to make a big deal.
Forget about it, he says.
Well, Im sorry.
Its alright.
Connell is pulling out of the driveway now. He has seemingly dismissed
the incident, but for some reason this doesnt satisfy her. She wants him to
acknowledge what happened before he lets her move on, or maybe she just
wants to make herself suffer unduly.
It wasnt appropriate, she says.
Look, you were pretty drunk.
Thats not an excuse.
And high out of your mind, he says, which I only found out later.
Yeah. I felt like an attacker.
Now he laughs. She pulls her knees against her chest and holds her
elbows in her hands.
You didnt attack me, he says. These things happen.
*
This is the thing that happened. Connell drove Marianne to a mutual
friends house for a birthday party. They had arranged to stay the night
there and Connell would drive her back the next morning. On the way they
listened to Vampire Weekend and Marianne drank from a silver flask of gin
and talked about the Reagan administration. Youre getting drunk, Connell
told her in the car. You know, you have a very nice face, she said. Other
people have actually said that to me, about your face.
By midnight Connell had wandered off somewhere at the party and
Marianne had found her friends Peggy and Joanna in the shed. They were
drinking a bottle of Cointreau together and smoking. Peggy was wearing a
beaten-up leather jacket and striped linen trousers. Her hair was loose
around her shoulders, and she was constantly throwing it to one side and
raking a hand through it. Joanna was sitting on top of the freezer unit in her
socks. She was wearing a long shapeless garment like a maternity dress,
with a shirt underneath. Marianne leaned against the washing machine and
retrieved her gin flask from her pocket. Peggy and Joanna had been talking
about mens fashion, and in particular the fashion sense of their own male
friends. Marianne was content just to stand there, allowing the washing
machine to support most of her body weight, swishing gin around the
inside of her mouth, and listening to her friends speaking.
Both Peggy and Joanna are studying History and Politics with
Marianne. Joanna is already planning her final-year thesis on James
Connolly and the Irish Trades Union Congress. Shes always
recommending books and articles, which Marianne reads or half-reads or
reads summaries of. People see Joanna as a serious person, which she is,
but she can also be very funny. Peggy doesnt really get Joannas humour,
because Peggys form of charisma is more terrifying and sexy than it is
comic. At a party before Christmas, Peggy cut Marianne a line of cocaine
in their friend Declans bathroom, and Marianne actually took it, or most of
it anyway. It had no appreciable effect on her mood, except that for days
afterwards she felt alternately amused at the idea that she had done it and
guilty. She hasnt told Joanna about that. She knows Joanna would
disapprove, because Marianne herself also disapproves, but when Joanna
disapproves of things she doesnt go ahead and do them anyway.
Joanna wants to work in journalism, while Peggy doesnt seem to want
to work at all. So far this hasnt been an issue for her, because she meets a
lot of men who like to fund her lifestyle by buying her handbags and
expensive drugs. She favours slightly older men who work for investment
banks or accounting agencies, twenty-seven-year-olds with lots of money
and sensible lawyer girlfriends at home. Joanna once asked Peggy if she
ever thought she herself might one day be a twenty-seven-year-old whose
boyfriend would stay out all night taking cocaine with a teenager. Peggy
wasnt remotely insulted, she thought it was really funny. She said she
would be married to a Russian oligarch by then anyway and she didnt care
how many girlfriends he had. It makes Marianne wonder what she herself
is going to do after college. Almost no paths seem definitively closed to
her, not even the path of marrying an oligarch. When she goes out at night,
men shout the most outrageously vulgar things at her on the street, so
obviously theyre not ashamed to desire her, quite the contrary. And in
college she often feels theres no limit to what her brain can do, it can
synthesise everything she puts into it, its like having a powerful machine
inside her head. Really she has everything going for her. She has no idea
what shes going to do with her life.
In the shed, Peggy asked where Connell was.
Upstairs, said Marianne. With Teresa, I guess.
Connell has been casually seeing a friend of theirs called Teresa.
Marianne has no real problem with Teresa, but finds herself frequently
prompting Connell to say bad things about her for no reason, which he
always refuses to do.
He wears nice clothes, volunteered Joanna.
Not really, said Peggy. I mean, he has a look, but its just tracksuits most
of the time. I doubt he even owns a suit.
Joanna sought Mariannes eye contact again, and this time Marianne
returned it. Peggy, watching, took a performatively large mouthful of
Cointreau and wiped her lips with the hand she was using to hold the bottle.
What? she said.
Well, isnt he from a fairly working-class background? said Joanna.
Thats so oversensitive, Peggy said. I cant criticise someones dress
sense because of their socio-economic status? Come on.
No, thats not what she meant, said Marianne.
Because you know, were all actually very nice to him, said Peggy.
Marianne found she couldnt look at either of her friends then. Whos
we? she wanted to say. Instead she took the bottle of Cointreau from
Peggys hand and swallowed two mouthfuls, lukewarm and repulsively
sweet.
Some time around two oclock in the morning, after she had become
extremely drunk and Peggy had convinced her to share a joint with her in
the bathroom, she saw Connell on the third-storey landing. No one else was
up there. Hey, he said. She leaned against the wall, drunk and wanting his
attention. He was at the top of the stairs.
Youve been off with Teresa, she said.
Have I? he said. Thats interesting. Youre completely out of it, are you?
You smell like perfume.
Teresas not here, said Connell. As in, shes not at the party.
Then Marianne laughed. She felt stupid, but in a good way. Come here,
she said. He came over to stand in front of her.
What? he said.
Do you like her better than me? said Marianne.
He tucked a strand of hair behind her ear.
No, he said. To be fair, I dont know her very well.
But is she better in bed than I am?
Youre drunk, Marianne. If you were sober you wouldnt even want to
know the answer to that question.
So its not the answer I want, she said.
She was engaging in this dialogue in a basically linear fashion, while at
the same time trying to unbutton one of Connells shirt buttons, not even in
a sexy way, but just because she was so drunk and high. Also she hadnt
managed to fully undo the button yet.
No, of course its the answer you want, he said.
Then she kissed him. He didnt recoil like he was horrified, but he did
pull away pretty firmly and said: No, come on.
Lets go upstairs, she said.
Yeah. We actually are upstairs.
I want you to fuck me.
He made a kind of frowning expression, which if she had been sober
would have induced her to pretend she had only been joking.
Not tonight, he said. Youre wasted.
Is that the only reason?
He looked down at her. She repressed a comment she had been saving
up about the shape of his mouth, how perfect it was, because she wanted
him to answer the question.
Yeah, he said. Thats it.
So you otherwise would do it.
You should go to bed.
Ill give you drugs, she said.
You dont even Marianne, you dont even have drugs. Thats just one
level of whats wrong with what youre saying. Go to bed.
Just kiss me.
He kissed her. It was a nice kiss, but friendly. Then he said goodnight
and went downstairs lightly, with his light sober body walking in straight
lines. Marianne went to find a bathroom, where she drank straight from the
tap until her head stopped hurting and afterwards fell asleep on the
bathroom floor. Thats where she woke up twenty minutes ago when
Connell asked one of the girls to find her.
*
Now hes flipping through the radio stations while they wait at a set of
traffic lights. He finds a Van Morrison song and leaves it playing.
Anyway, Im sorry, says Marianne again. I wasnt trying to make things
weird with Teresa.
Shes not my girlfriend.
Okay. But it was disrespectful of our friendship.
I didnt realise you were even close with her, he says.
I meant my friendship with you.
He looks around at her. She tightens her arms around her knees and
tucks her chin into her shoulder. Lately she and Connell have been seeing a
lot of each other. In Dublin they can walk down long stately streets together
for the first time, confident that nobody they pass knows or cares who they
are. Marianne lives alone in a one-bedroom apartment belonging to her
grandmother, and in the evenings she and Connell sit in her living room
drinking wine together. He complains to her, seemingly without
reservation, about how hard it is to make friends in Trinity. The other day
he lay on her couch and rolled the dregs of wine around in his glass and
said: People here are such snobs. Even if they liked me I honestly wouldnt
want to be friends with them. He put his glass down and looked at
Marianne. Thats why its easy for you, by the way, he said. Because youre
from a rich family, thats why people like you. She frowned and nodded,
and then Connell started laughing. Im messing with you, he said. Their
eyes met. She wanted to laugh, but she didnt know if the joke was on her.
He always comes to her parties, though he says he doesnt really
understand her friendship group. Her female friends like him a lot, and for
some reason feel very comfortable sitting on his lap during conversations
and tousling his hair fondly. The men have not warmed to him in the same
way. He is tolerated through his association with Marianne, but hes not
considered in his own right particularly interesting. Hes not even smart!
one of her male friends exclaimed the other night when Connell wasnt
there. Hes smarter than I am, said Marianne. No one knew what to say
then. Its true that Connell is quiet at parties, stubbornly quiet even, and not
interested in showing off how many books he has read or how many wars
he knows about. But Marianne is aware, deep down, that thats not why
people think hes stupid.
How was it disrespectful to our friendship? he says.
I think it would be difficult to stay friends if we started sleeping
together.
He makes a devilish grinning expression. Confused, she hides her face
in her arm.
Would it? he says.
I dont know.
Well, alright.
*
One night in the basement of Bruxelles, two of Mariannes friends were
playing a clumsy game of pool while the others sat around drinking and
watching. After Jamie won he said: Who wants to play the winner? And
Connell put his pint down quietly and said: Alright, yeah. Jamie broke but
didnt pot anything. Without engaging in any conversation at all, Connell
then potted four of the yellow balls in a row. Marianne started laughing, but
Connell was expressionless, just focused-looking. In the short time after his
turn he drank silently and watched Jamie send a red ball spinning off the
cushion. Then Connell chalked his cue briskly and resumed pocketing the
final three yellows. There was something so satisfying about the way he
studied the table and lined the shots up, and the quiet kiss of the chalk
against the smooth surface of the cue ball. The girls all sat around watching
him take shots, watching him lean over the table with his hard, silent face
lit by the overhead lamp. Its like a Diet Coke ad, said Marianne. Everyone
laughed then, even Connell did. When it was just the black ball left he
pointed at the top right-hand pocket and, gratifyingly, said: Alright,
Marianne, are you watching? Then he potted it. Everyone applauded.
Instead of walking home that night, Connell came back to stay at hers.
They lay in her bed looking up at the ceiling and talking. Until then they
had always avoided discussing what had happened between them the year
before, but that night Connell said: Do your friends know about us?
Marianne paused. What about us? she said eventually.
What happened in school and all that.
No, I dont think so. Maybe theyve picked up on something but I never
told them.
For a few seconds Connell said nothing. She was attuned to his silence
in the darkness.
Would you be embarrassed if they found out? he said.
In some ways, yeah.
He turned over then, so he wasnt looking up at the ceiling anymore but
facing her. Why? he said.
Because it was humiliating.
You mean like, the way I treated you.
Well, yeah, she said. And just the fact that I put up with it.
Carefully he felt for her hand under the quilt and she let him hold it. A
shiver ran along her jaw and she tried to make her voice sound light and
humorous.
Did you ever think about asking me to the Debs? she said. Its such a
stupid thing but Im curious whether you thought about it.
To be honest, no. I wish I did.
She nodded. She continued looking up at the black ceiling, swallowing,
worried that he could make out her expression.
Would you have said yes? he asked.
She nodded again. She tried to roll her eyes at herself but it felt ugly and
self-pitying rather than funny.
Im really sorry, he said. I did the wrong thing there. And you know,
apparently people in school kind of knew about us anyway. I dont know if
you heard that.
She sat up on her elbow and stared down at him in the darkness.
Knew what? she said.
That we were seeing each other and all that.
I didnt tell anyone, Connell, I swear to god.
She could see him wince even in the dark.
No, I know, he said. My point is more that it wouldnt have mattered
even if you did tell people. But I know you didnt.
Were they horrible about it?
No, no. Eric just mentioned it at the Debs, that people knew. No one
cared, really.
There was another short silence between them.
I feel guilty for all the stuff I said to you, Connell added. About how bad
it would be if anyone found out. Obviously that was more in my head than
anything. I mean, there was no reason why people would care. But I kind of
suffer from anxiety with these things. Not that Im making excuses, but I
think I projected some anxiety onto you, if that makes sense. I dont know.
Im still thinking about it a lot, why I acted in such a fucked-up way.
She squeezed his hand and he squeezed back, so tightly it almost hurt
her, and this small gesture of desperation on his part made her smile.
I forgive you, she said.
Thank you. I think I did learn from it. And hopefully I have changed,
you know, as a person. But honestly, if I have, its because of you.
They kept holding hands underneath the quilt, even after they went to
sleep.
*
When they get to her apartment now she asks if he wants to come in. He
says he needs to eat something and she says there are breakfast things in
the fridge. They go upstairs together. Connell starts looking in the fridge
while she goes to take a shower. She strips all her clothes off, turns the
water pressure up as high as it goes and showers for nearly twenty minutes.
Then she feels better. When she comes out, wrapped in a white bathrobe,
her hair towelled dry, Connell has eaten already. His plate is clean and hes
checking his email. The room smells like coffee and frying. She goes
towards him and he wipes his mouth with the back of his hand, as if hes
nervous suddenly. She stands at his chair and, looking up at her, he undoes
the sash of her bathrobe. Its been nearly a year. He touches his lips to her
skin and she feels holy, like a shrine. Come to bed, then, she says. He goes
with her.
Afterwards she switches on the hairdryer and he gets in the shower.
Then she lies down again, listening to the sound of the pipes. Shes smiling.
When Connell comes out he lies beside her, they face one another, and he
touches her. Hm, she says. They have sex again, not speaking very much.
After that she feels peaceful and wants to sleep. He kisses her closed
eyelids. Its not like this with other people, she says. Yeah, he says. I know.
She senses there are things he isnt saying to her. She cant tell whether
hes holding back a desire to pull away from her, or a desire to make
himself more vulnerable somehow. He kisses her neck. Her eyes are getting
heavy. I think well be fine, he says. She doesnt know or cant remember
what hes talking about. She falls asleep.
Two Months Later
(APRIL 2012)
Hes just come back from the library. Marianne has had friends over but
theyre heading off when he arrives, taking their jackets from the hooks in
the hallway. Peggy is the only one still sitting at the table, draining a bottle
of ros into a huge glass. Marianne is wiping down the countertop with a
wet cloth. The window over the kitchen sink shows an oblong of sky,
denim-blue. Connell sits at the table and Marianne takes a beer out of the
fridge and opens it for him. She asks if hes hungry and he says no. Its
warm out and the cool of the bottle feels good. Their exams are starting
soon, and he usually stays in the library now until the man comes around
ringing the bell to say its closing.
Can I just ask something? says Peggy.
He can tell shes drunk and that Marianne would like her to leave. He
would like her to leave too.
Sure, says Marianne.
You guys are fucking each other, right? Peggy says. Like, you sleep
together.
Connell says nothing. He runs his thumb over the label on the beer
bottle, feeling for a corner to peel off. He has no idea what Marianne will
come up with: something funny, he thinks, something that will make Peggy
laugh and forget the question. Instead, unexpectedly, Marianne says: Oh,
yeah. He starts smiling to himself. The corner of the beer label comes away
from the glass under his thumb.
Peggy laughs. Okay, she says. Good to know. Everyone is speculating,
by the way.
Well, yeah, says Marianne. But its not a new thing, we used to hook up
in school.
Oh really? Peggy says.
Marianne is pouring herself a glass of water. When she turns around,
holding the glass, she looks at Connell.
I hope you dont mind me saying that now, she says.
He shrugs, but hes smiling at her, and she smiles back. They dont
advertise the relationship, but his friends know about it. He doesnt like
public displays, thats all. Marianne asked him once if he was ashamed of
her but she was just joking. Thats funny, he said. Niall thinks I brag about
you too much. She loved that. He doesnt really brag about her as such,
though as it happens she is very popular and a lot of other men want to
sleep with her. He might brag about her occasionally, but only in a tasteful
way.
You actually make a very cute couple, says Peggy.
Thanks, Connell says.
I didnt say couple, says Marianne.
Oh, says Peggy. You mean like, youre not exclusive? Thats cool. I
wanted to try an open-relationship thing with Lorcan but he was really
against it.
Marianne drags a chair back from the table and sits down. Men can be
possessive, she says.
I know! says Peggy. Its crazy. Youd think they would jump at the idea
of multiple partners.
Generally I find men are a lot more concerned with limiting the
freedoms of women than exercising personal freedom for themselves, says
Marianne.
Is that true? Peggy says to Connell.
He looks at Marianne with a little nod, preferring her to continue. He
has come to know Peggy as the loud friend who interrupts all the time.
Marianne has other, preferable friends, but they never stay as late or talk as
much.
I mean, when you look at the lives men are really living, its sad,
Marianne says. They control the whole social system and this is the best
they can come up with for themselves? Theyre not even having fun.
Peggy laughs. Are you having fun, Connell? she says.
Hm, he says. A reasonable amount, I would say. But I agree with the
point.
Would you rather live under a matriarchy? says Peggy.
Difficult to know. Id give it a go anyway, see what it was like.
Peggy keeps laughing, as if Connell is being unbelievably witty. Dont
you enjoy your male privilege? she says.
Its like Marianne was saying, he replies. Its not that enjoyable to have.
I mean, it is what it is, I dont get much fun out of it.
Peggy gives a toothy grin. If I were a man, she says, I would have as
many as three girlfriends. If not more.
The last corner of the label peels off Connells beer bottle now. It comes
off more easily when the bottle is very cold, because the condensation
dissolves the glue. He puts the beer on the table and starts to fold the label
up into a small square. Peggy goes on talking but it doesnt seem important
to listen to her.
Things are pretty good between him and Marianne at the moment. After
the library closes in the evening he walks back to her apartment, maybe
picking up some food or a four-euro bottle of wine on the way. When the
weather is good, the sky feels miles away, and birds wheel through
limitless air and light overhead. When it rains, the city closes in, gathers
around with mists; cars move slower, their headlights glowing darkly, and
the faces that pass are pink with cold. Marianne cooks dinner, spaghetti or
risotto, and then he washes up and tidies the kitchen. He wipes crumbs out
from under the toaster and she reads him jokes from Twitter. After that they
go to bed. He likes to get very deep inside her, slowly, until her breathing is
loud and hard and she clutches at the pillowcase with one hand. Her body
feels so small then and so open. Like this? he says. And shes nodding her
head and maybe punching her hand on the pillow, making little gasps
whenever he moves.
The conversations that follow are gratifying for Connell, often taking
unexpected turns and prompting him to express ideas he had never
consciously formulated before. They talk about the novels hes reading, the
research she studies, the precise historical moment that they are currently
living in, the difficulty of observing such a moment in process. At times he
has the sensation that he and Marianne are like figure-skaters, improvising
their discussions so adeptly and in such perfect synchronisation that it
surprises them both. She tosses herself gracefully into the air, and each
time, without knowing how hes going to do it, he catches her. Knowing
that theyll probably have sex again before they sleep probably makes the
talking more pleasurable, and he suspects that the intimacy of their
discussions, often moving back and forth from the conceptual to the
personal, also makes the sex feel better. Last Friday, when they were lying
there afterwards, she said: That was intense, wasnt it? He told her he
always found it pretty intense. But I mean practically romantic, said
Marianne. I think I was starting to have feelings for you there at one point.
He smiled at the ceiling. You just have to repress all that stuff, Marianne,
he said. Thats what I do.
Marianne knows how he feels about her really. Just because he gets shy
in front of her friends doesnt mean its not serious between them  it is.
Occasionally he worries he hasnt been sufficiently clear on this point, and
after letting this worry build up for a day or so, wondering how he can
approach the issue, hell finally say something sheepish like: You know I
really like you, dont you? And his tone will sound almost annoyed for
some reason, and shell just laugh. Marianne has a lot of other romantic
options, as everyone knows. Politics students who turn up to her parties
with bottles of Mot and anecdotes about their summers in India.
Committee members of college clubs, who are dressed up in black tie very
frequently, and who inexplicably believe that the internal workings of
student societies are interesting to normal people. Guys who make a habit
of touching Marianne casually during conversation, fixing her hair or
placing a hand on her back. Once, when foolishly drunk, Connell asked
Marianne why these people had to be so tactile with her, and she said: You
wont touch me, but no one else is allowed to either? That put him in a
terrible mood.
He doesnt go home at the weekends anymore because their friend
Sophie got him a new job in her dads restaurant. Connell just sits in an
upstairs office at the weekends answering emails and writing bookings
down in a big leather appointment book. Sometimes minor celebrities call
in, like people from RT and that kind of thing, but most weeknights the
place is dead. Its obvious to Connell that the business is haemorrhaging
money and will have to close down, but the job was so easy to come by that
he cant work up any real anxiety about this prospect. If and when hes out
of work, one of Mariannes other rich friends will just come up with
another job for him to do. Rich people look out for each other, and being
Mariannes best friend and suspected sexual partner has elevated Connell to
the status of rich-adjacent: someone for whom surprise birthday parties are
thrown and cushy jobs are procured out of nowhere.
Before term ended he had to give a class presentation on the Morte
Darthur, and while he spoke his hands were shaking and he couldnt look
up from the printouts to see if anyone was actually listening to him. His
voice wavered several times and he had the sense that if he hadnt been
seated, he would have fallen to the ground. Only later did he find out that
this presentation was considered very impressive. One of his classmates
actually called him a genius to his face afterwards, in a dismissive tone of
voice, like geniuses were slightly despicable people. It is generally known
in their year group that Connell has received the highest grade in all but
one module, and he finds he likes to be thought of as intelligent, if only
because it makes his interactions with other people more legible. He likes
when someone is struggling to remember the name of a book or an author,
and he can provide it for them readily, not showing off, just remembering
it. He likes when Marianne tells her friends  people whose fathers are
judges and government ministers, people who went to inordinately
expensive schools  that Connell is the smartest person they will ever
meet.
What about you, Connell? says Peggy.
He has not been listening, and all he can say in response is: What?
Tempted by the idea of multiple partners? she says.
He looks at her. She has an arch expression on her face.
Uh, he says. I dont know. What do you mean?
Do you not fantasise about having your own harem? says Peggy. I
thought that was a universal thing for men.
Oh, right. No, not really.
Maybe just two, then, Peggy says.
Two what, two women?
Peggy looks at Marianne and makes a mischievous kind of giggling
noise. Marianne sips her water calmly.
We can if you want to, says Peggy.
Wait, sorry, Connell says. We can what?
Well, whatever you call it, she says. A threesome or whatever.
Oh, he says. And he laughs at his own stupidity. Right, he says. Right,
sorry. He folds the label over again, not knowing what else to say. I missed
that, he adds. He cant do it. Hes not indecisive on the question of whether
hed like to do it or not, he actually cant do it. For some reason, and he
cant explain it to himself, he thinks maybe he could fuck Peggy in front of
Marianne, although it would be awkward, and not necessarily enjoyable.
But he could not, hes immediately certain, ever do anything to Marianne
with Peggy watching, or any of her friends watching, or anyone at all. He
feels shameful and confused even to think about it. Its something he
doesnt understand in himself. For the privacy between himself and
Marianne to be invaded by Peggy, or by another person, would destroy
something inside him, a part of his selfhood, which doesnt seem to have a
name and which he has never tried to identify before. He folds the damp
beer label up one more time so its very small and tightly folded now. Hm,
he says.
Oh no, says Marianne. Im much too self-conscious. Id die.
Peggy says: Really? She says this in a pleasant, interested tone of voice,
like shes just as happy discussing Mariannes self-consciousness as she
would be engaging in group sex. Connell tries not to display any outward
relief.
I have all kinds of hang-ups, says Marianne. Very neurotic.
Peggy compliments Mariannes appearance in a routine, effeminate way
and asks what her hang-ups are about.
Marianne pinches her lower lip and then says: Well, I dont feel lovable.
I think I have an unlovable sort of  I have a coldness about me, Im
difficult to like. She gestures one of her long, thin hands in the air, like
shes only approximating what she means rather than really nailing it.
I dont believe that, says Peggy. Is she cold with you?
Connell coughs and says: No.
She and Marianne continue talking and he rolls the folded label between
his fingers, feeling anxious.
*
Marianne went home for a couple of days this week, and when she came
back to Dublin last night she seemed quiet. They watched The Umbrellas of
Cherbourg together in her apartment. At the end Marianne cried, but she
turned her face away so it looked like she wasnt crying. This unsettled
Connell. The film had a pretty sad ending but he didnt really see what
there was to cry about. Are you okay? he said. She nodded, with her face
turned, so he could see a white tendon in her neck pressing outwards.
Hey, he said. Is something upsetting you?
She shook her head but didnt turn around. He went to make her a cup
of tea and by the time he brought it to her she had stopped crying. He
touched her hair and she smiled, weakly. The character in the film had
become pregnant unexpectedly, and Connell was trying to remember when
Marianne had last had her period. The longer he thought about it, the longer
ago it seemed to have been. Eventually, in a panic, he said: Hey, youre not
pregnant or anything, are you? Marianne laughed. That settled his nerves.
No, she said. I got my period this morning.
Okay. Well, thats good.
What would you do if I was?
He smiled, he inhaled through his mouth. Kind of depends on what you
would want to do, he said.
I admit I would have a slight temptation to keep it. But I wouldnt do
that to you, dont worry.
Really? What would the temptation be? Sorry if thats insensitive to say.
I dont know, she said. In a way I like the idea of something so dramatic
happening to me. I would like to upset peoples expectations. Do you think
Id be a bad mother?
No, youd be great, obviously. Youre great at everything you do.
She smiled. You wouldnt have to be involved, she said.
Well, I would support you, whatever you decided.
He didnt know why he was saying he would support her, since he had
virtually no spare income and no prospect of having any. It felt like the
thing to say, that was all. Really he had never considered it. Marianne
seemed like the kind of straightforward person who would arrange the
whole procedure herself, and at most maybe he would go with her on the
plane.
Imagine what theyd say in Carricklea, she said.
Oh, yeah. Lorraine would never forgive me.
Marianne looked up quickly and said: Why, she doesnt like me?
No, she loves you. I mean she wouldnt forgive me for doing that to
you. She loves you, dont worry. You know that. She thinks youre much
too good for me.
Marianne smiled again then, and touched his face with her hand. He
liked that, so he moved towards her a little and stroked the pale underside
of her wrist.
What about your family? he said. I guess theyd never forgive me either.
She shrugged, she dropped her hand back into her lap.
Do they know were seeing each other now? he said.
She shook her head. She looked away, she held her hand against her
cheek.
Not that you have to tell them, he said. Maybe theyd disapprove of me
anyway. They probably want you going out with a doctor or a lawyer or
something, do they?
I dont think they care very much what I do.
She covered her face using her flattened hands for a moment, and then
she rubbed her nose briskly and sniffed. Connell knew she had a strained
relationship with her family. He first came to realise this when they were
still in school, and it didnt strike him as unusual, because Marianne had
strained relationships with everyone then. Her brother Alan was a few
years older, and had what Lorraine called a weak personality. Honestly it
was hard to imagine him standing his ground in a conflict with Marianne.
But now theyre both grown up and still she almost never goes home, or
she goes and then comes back like this, distracted and sullen, saying she
had a fight with her family again, and not wanting to talk about it.
You had another falling-out with them, did you? Connell said.
She nodded. They dont like me very much, she said.
I know it probably feels like they dont, he said. But at the end of the
day theyre your family, they love you.
Marianne said nothing. She didnt nod or shake her head, she just sat
there. Soon after that they went to bed. She was having cramps and she said
it might hurt to have sex, so he just touched her until she came. Then she
was in a good mood and making luxurious moaning noises and saying:
God, that was so nice. He got out of bed and went to wash his hands in the
en suite, a small pink-tiled room with a potted plant in the corner and little
jars of face cream and perfume everywhere. Rinsing his hands under the
tap, he asked Marianne if she was feeling better. And from bed she said: I
feel wonderful, thank you. In the mirror he noticed he had a little blood on
his lower lip. He must have brushed it with his hand by accident. He
rubbed at it with the wet part of his knuckle, and from the other room
Marianne said: Imagine how bitter Im going to be when you meet
someone else and fall in love. She often makes little jokes like this. He
dried his hands and switched off the bathroom light.
I dont know, he said. This is a pretty good arrangement, from my point
of view.
Well, I do my best.
He got back into bed beside her and kissed her face. She had been sad
before, after the film, but now she was happy. It was in Connells power to
make her happy. It was something he could just give to her, like money or
sex. With other people she seemed so independent and remote, but with
Connell she was different, a different person. He was the only one who
knew her like that.
*
Eventually Peggy finishes her wine and leaves. Connell sits at the table
while Marianne sees her out. The outside door closes and Marianne reenters
the kitchen. She rinses her water glass and leaves it upside down on
the draining board. Hes waiting for her to look at him.
You saved my life, he says.
She turns around, smiling, rolling her sleeves back down.
I wouldnt have enjoyed it either, she says. I would have done it if you
wanted, but I could see you didnt.
He looks at her. He keeps looking at her until she says: What?
You shouldnt do things you dont want to do, he says.
Oh, I didnt mean that.
She throws her hands up, like the issue is irrelevant. In a direct sense he
understands that it is. He tries to soften his manner since anyway its not
like hes annoyed at her.
Well, it was a good intervention on your part, he says. Very attentive to
my preferences.
I try to be.
Yeah, you are. Come here.
She comes to sit down with him and he touches her cheek. He has a
terrible sense all of a sudden that he could hit her face, very hard even, and
she would just sit there and let him. The idea frightens him so badly that he
pulls his chair back and stands up. His hands are shaking. He doesnt know
why he thought about it. Maybe he wants to do it. But it makes him feel
sick.
Whats wrong? she says.
He feels a kind of tingling in his fingers now and he cant breathe right.
Oh, I dont know, he says. I dont know, sorry.
Did I do something?
No, no. Sorry. I had a weird  I feel weird. I dont know.
She doesnt get up. But she would, wouldnt she, if he told her to get up.
His heart is pounding now and he feels dizzy.
Do you feel sick? she says. Youve gone kind of white.
Here, Marianne. Youre not cold, you know. Youre not like that, not at
all.
She gives him a strange look, screwing her face up. Well, maybe cold
was the wrong word, she says. It doesnt really matter.
But youre not hard to like. You know? Everyone likes you.
I didnt explain it well. Forget about it.
He nods. He still cant breathe normally. Well, what did you mean? he
says. Shes looking at him now, and finally she does stand up. You look
morbidly pale, she says. Are you feeling faint? He says no. She takes his
hand and tells him it feels damp. He nods, hes breathing hard. Quietly
Marianne says: If Ive done something to upset you, Im really sorry. He
forces a laugh and takes his hand away. No, a weird feeling came over me,
he says. I dont know what it was. Im okay now.
Three Months Later
(JULY 2012)
Marianne is reading the back of a yoghurt pot in the supermarket. With her
other hand shes holding her phone, through which Joanna is telling an
anecdote about her job. When Joanna gets into an anecdote she can really
monologue at length, so Marianne isnt worried about taking her attention
off the conversation for a few seconds to read the yoghurt pot. Its a warm
day outside, shes wearing a light blouse and skirt, and the chill of the
freezer aisle raises goosebumps on her arms. She has no reason to be in the
supermarket, except that she doesnt want to be in her family home, and
there arent many spaces in which a solitary person can be inconspicuous in
Carricklea. She cant go for a drink alone, or get a cup of coffee on Main
Street. Even the supermarket will exhaust its usefulness when people notice
shes not really buying groceries, or when she sees someone she knows and
has to go through the motions of conversation.
The office is half-empty so nothing really gets done, Joanna is saying.
But Im still getting paid so I dont mind.
Because Joanna has a job now, most of their conversations take place
over the phone, even though theyre both living in Dublin. Mariannes only
home for the weekend, but thats Joannas only time off work. On the
phone Joanna frequently describes her office, the various characters who
work there, the dramas that erupt between them, and its as if shes a citizen
of a country Marianne has never visited, the country of paid employment.
Marianne replaces the yoghurt pot in the freezer now and asks Joanna if she
finds it strange, to be paid for her hours at work  to exchange, in other
words, blocks of her extremely limited time on this earth for the human
invention known as money.
Its time youll never get back, Marianne adds. I mean, the time is real.
The money is also real.
Well, but the time is more real. Time consists of physics, money is just a
social construct.
Yes, but Im still alive at work, says Joanna. Its still me, Im still having
experiences. Youre not working, okay, but the time is passing for you too.
Youll never get it back either.
But I can decide what I do with it.
To that I would venture that your decision-making is also a social
construct.
Marianne laughs. She wanders out of the freezer aisle and towards the
snacks.
I dont buy into the morality of work, she says. Some work maybe, but
youre just moving paper around an office, youre not contributing to the
human effort.
I didnt say anything about morality.
Marianne lifts a packet of dried fruit and examines it, but it contains
raisins so she puts it back down and picks up another.
Do you think I judge you for being so idle? says Joanna.
Deep down I think you do. You judge Peggy.
Peggy has an idle mind, which is different.
Marianne clicks her tongue as if to scold Joanna for her cruelty, but not
with any great investment. Shes reading the back of a dried apple packet.
I wouldnt want you to turn into Peggy, says Joanna. I like you the way
you are.
Oh, Peggys not that bad. Im going to the supermarket checkout now so
Im going to hang up.
Okay. You can call tomorrow after the thing if you feel like talking.
Thanks, says Marianne. Youre a good friend. Bye.
Marianne makes her way to the self-service checkout, picking up a
bottle of iced tea on the way and carrying the dried apples. When she
reaches the row of self-service machines, she sees Lorraine unloading a
basket of various groceries. Lorraine stops when she sees Marianne and
says: Hello there! Marianne clutches the dried fruit against her ribcage and
says hi.
How are you getting on? says Lorraine.
Good, thanks. And you?
Connell tells me youre top of your class. Winning prizes and all kinds
of things. Doesnt surprise me, of course.
Marianne smiles. Her smile feels gummy and childish. She squeezes the
package of dried fruit, feels it crackle under her damp grip, and scans it on
the machine. The supermarket lights are chlorine-white and shes not
wearing any make-up.
Oh, she says. Nothing major.
Connell comes around the corner, of course he does. Hes carrying a
six-pack of crisps, salt and vinegar flavour. Hes wearing a white T-shirt
and those sweatpants with the stripes down the side. His shoulders seem
bigger now. And he looks at her. Hes been in the supermarket the whole
time; maybe he even saw her in the freezer aisle and walked past quickly to
avoid making eye contact. Maybe he heard her talking on the phone.
Hello, says Marianne.
Oh, hey. I didnt know you were in town.
He glances at his mother, and then scans the crisps and puts them in the
bagging area. His surprise at seeing Marianne seems genuine, or at least his
reluctance to look at or speak to her does.
I hear youre very popular up there in Dublin, Lorraine says. See, I get
all the gossip from Trinity now.
Connell doesnt look up. Hes scanning the other items from the trolley:
a box of teabags, a loaf of sliced pan.
Your sons just being kind, Im sure, says Marianne.
She takes her purse out and pays for her items, which cost three euro
eighty-nine. Lorraine and Connell are packing their groceries into reusable
plastic bags.
Can we offer you a lift home? Lorraine says.
Oh, no, says Marianne. Ill walk. But thank you.
Walk! says Lorraine. Out to Blackfort Road? Do not. Well give you a
lift.
Connell takes both the plastic bags in his arms and cocks his head
towards the door.
Come on, he says.
Marianne hasnt seen him since May. He moved home after the exams
and she stayed in Dublin. He said he wanted to see other people and she
said: Okay. Now, because she was never really his girlfriend, shes not even
his ex-girlfriend. Shes nothing. They all get in the car together, Marianne
sitting in the back seat, while Connell and Lorraine have a conversation
about someone they know who has died, but an elderly person so its not
that sad. Marianne stares out the window.
Well, Im delighted we bumped into you, says Lorraine. Its great to see
you looking so well.
Oh, thank you.
How long are you in town for?
Just the weekend, says Marianne.
Eventually Connell indicates at the entrance to the Foxfield estate and
pulls in outside his house. Lorraine gets out. Connell glances at Marianne
in the rear-view mirror and says: Here, get in the front, will you? Im not a
taxi driver. Wordlessly Marianne complies. Lorraine opens the boot and
Connell twists around in his seat. Leave the bags, he says. Ill bring them in
when Im back. She puts up her hands in surrender, shuts the boot and then
waves them off.
Its a short drive from Connells house to Mariannes. He takes a left out
of the estate, towards the roundabout. Only a few months ago he and
Marianne used to stay up all night together talking and having sex. He used
to pull the blankets off her in the morning and get on top of her with this
little smiling expression like: Oh hey, hello. They were best friends. He told
her that, when she asked him who his best friend was. You, he said. Then at
the end of May he told her he was moving home for the summer.
How are things, anyway? he says.
Fine, thanks. How are you?
Im alright, yeah.
He changes gears with a domineering gesture of his hand.
Are you still working in the garage? she asks.
No, no. You mean where I used to work? That place is closed now.
Is it?
Yeah, he says. No, Ive been working in the Bistro. Actually your mam
was in the other night with her, uh. Her boyfriend or whatever it is.
Marianne nods. They are driving past the football grounds now. A thin
veil of rain begins to fall on the windshield, and Connell turns the wipers
on, so they scrape out a mechanical rhythm on their voyage from side to
side.
*
When Connell went home for Reading Week in the spring, he asked
Marianne if she would send him naked pictures of herself. Ill delete them
whenever you want obviously, he said. You can supervise. This suggested
to Marianne a whole erotic ritual she had never heard of. Why would I
want you to delete them? she said. They were talking on the phone, Connell
at home in Foxfield and Marianne lying on her bed in Merrion Square. He
explained briefly the politics of naked pictures, not showing them to
people, deleting them on request, and so on.
Do you get these photos from a lot of girls? she asked him.
Well, I dont have any now. And Ive never actually asked for any
before, but sometimes you do get sent them.
She asked if he would send her back photographs of himself in return,
and he made a hm noise.
I dont know, he said. Would you really want a picture of my dick?
Comically, she felt the inside of her mouth get wet.
Yes, she said. But if you sent one I would honestly never delete it, so
you probably shouldnt.
He laughed then. No, I dont care whether you delete it, he said.
She uncrossed her ankles. I mean Ill take it to my grave, she said. Like
I will look at it probably every day until I die.
He was really laughing then. Marianne, he said, Im not a religious
person but I do sometimes think God made you for me.
*
The sports centre flashes past the drivers-side window through the blur of
rainfall. Connell looks at Marianne again, then back at the road.
And youre with this guy Jamie now, arent you? he says. So I hear.
Yeah.
Hes not a bad-looking guy.
Oh, she says. Well, okay. Thanks.
She and Jamie have been together for a few weeks now. He has certain
proclivities. They have certain shared proclivities. Sometimes in the middle
of the day she remembers something Jamie has said or done to her, and all
her energy leaves her completely, so her body feels like a carcass,
something immensely heavy and awful that she has to carry around.
Yeah, says Connell. I actually beat him in a game of pool once. You
probably dont remember.
I do.
Connell nods and adds: He always liked you. Marianne stares out the
windshield at the car ahead. Its true, Jamie always liked her. He sent her a
text once implying that Connell wasnt serious about her. She showed
Connell the text and they laughed about it. They were in bed together at the
time, Connells face illuminated by the lit display on her phone screen. You
should be with someone who takes you seriously, the message read.
What about you, are you seeing anyone? she says.
Not really. Nothing serious.
Embracing the single lifestyle.
You know me, he says.
I did once.
He frowns. Thats a bit philosophical, he says. I havent changed much
in the last few months.
Neither have I. Actually, yeah. I havent changed at all.
*
One night in May, Mariannes friend Sophie threw a house party to
celebrate the end of the exams. Her parents were in Sicily or somewhere
like that. Connell still had an exam left at the time, but he wasnt worried
about it, so he came along too. All their friends were there, partly because
Sophie had a heated swimming pool in her basement. They spent most of
the night in their swimsuits, dipping in and out of the water, drinking and
talking. Marianne sat at the side with a plastic cup of wine, while some of
the others played a game in the pool. It seemed to involve people sitting on
other peoples shoulders and trying to knock each other into the water.
Sophie got up onto Connells shoulders for the second match, and said
appreciatively: Thats a nice solid torso you have. Marianne looked on,
slightly drunk, admiring the way Sophie and Connell looked together, his
hands on her smooth brown shins, and feeling a strange sense of nostalgia
for a moment that was already in the process of happening. Sophie looked
over at her then.
No need to worry, Marianne, she called. Im not going to steal him
away.
Marianne thought Connell would gaze off into the water, pretending not
to hear, but instead he looked around at her and smiled.
Shes not worried, he said.
She didnt know what that meant, really, but she smiled, and then the
game began. She felt happy to be surrounded by people she liked, who
liked her. She knew that if she wanted to speak, everyone would probably
turn around and listen out of sincere interest, and that made her happy too,
although she had nothing at all to say.
After the game was finished Connell came over to her, standing in the
water where her legs were dangling. She looked down at him benignly. I
was admiring you, she said. He pushed his wet hair back from his forehead.
Youre always admiring me, he said. She kicked her leg at him gently and
he put his hand around her ankle and stroked it with his fingers. You and
Sophie make an athletic team, she said. He kept stroking her leg under the
water. It felt very nice. The others were calling him back to the deeper end
then, they wanted to have another game. Youre alright, he said. Im having
a break for this round. Then he hopped up onto the side of the pool, beside
her. His body was glistening wet. He put his hand flat on the tiles behind
her to steady himself.
Come here, he said.
He put his arm around her waist. He had never, ever touched her in front
of anyone else before. Their friends had never seen them together like this,
no one had. In the pool the others were still splashing and yelling.
Thats nice, she said.
He turned his head and kissed her bare shoulder. She laughed again,
shocked and gratified. He glanced back out at the water and then looked at
her.
Youre happy now, he said. Youre smiling.
Youre right, I am happy.
He nodded towards the pool, where Peggy had just fallen into the water,
and people were laughing.
Is this what life is like? Connell said.
She looked at his face, but she couldnt tell from his expression if he
was pleased or miserable. What do you mean? she said. But he only
shrugged. A few days later he told her he was leaving Dublin for the
summer.
*
You didnt tell me you were in town, he says now.
She nods slowly, like shes thinking about it, like it just now occurs to
her that in fact she did not tell Connell she was in town, and its an
interesting thought.
So what, are we not friends anymore? he says.
Of course we are.
You dont reply to my messages very much.
Admittedly she has been ignoring him. She had to tell people what had
happened between them, that he had broken up with her and moved away,
and it mortified her. She was the one who had introduced Connell to
everyone, who had told them all what great company he was, how sensitive
and intelligent, and he had repaid her by staying in her apartment almost
every night for three months, drinking the beer she bought for him, and
then abruptly dumping her. It made her look like such a fool. Peggy
laughed it off, of course, saying men were all the same. Joanna didnt seem
to think the situation was funny at all, but puzzling, and sad. She kept
asking what each of them had specifically said during the break-up, and
then she would go quiet, as if she was re-enacting the scene in her mind to
try and make sense of it.
Joanna wanted to know if Connell knew about Mariannes family.
Everyone in Carricklea knows each other, Marianne said. Joanna shook her
head and said: But I mean, does he know what theyre like? Marianne
couldnt answer that. She feels that even she doesnt know what her family
are like, that shes never adequate in her attempts to describe them, that she
oscillates between exaggerating their behaviour, which makes her feel
guilty, or downplaying it, which also makes her feel guilty, but a different
guilt, more inwardly directed. Joanna believes that she knows what
Mariannes family are like, but how can she, how can anyone, when
Marianne herself doesnt? Of course Connell cant. Hes a well-adjusted
person raised in a loving home. He just assumes the best of everyone and
knows nothing.
I thought you would at least text me if you were coming home, he says.
Its kind of weird running into you when I didnt know you were around.
At this moment she remembers leaving a flask in Connells car the day
they drove to Howth in April, and she never got the flask back. It might
still be in his glovebox. She eyes the glovebox but doesnt feel she can
open it, because he would ask what she was doing and she would have to
bring up the trip to Howth. They went swimming in the sea that day and
then parked his car somewhere out of sight and had sex in the back seat. It
would be shameless to remind him of that day now that theyre once again
in the car together, even though she would really like her flask back, or
maybe its not about the flask, maybe she just wants to remind him he once
fucked her in the back seat of the car theyre now sitting in, she knows it
would make him blush, and maybe she wants to force him to blush as a
sadistic display of power, but that wouldnt be like her, so she says nothing.
What are you doing in town anyway? he says. Just visiting your family?
Its my fathers anniversary Mass.
Oh, he says. He glances over at her, then back out the windshield. Sorry,
he adds. I didnt realise. When is that, tomorrow morning?
She nods. Half ten, she says.
Sorry about that, Marianne. That was stupid of me.
Its alright. I didnt really want to come home for it but my mother kind
of insists. Im not a big Mass person.
No, he says. Yeah.
He coughs. She stares out the windshield. Theyre at the top of her
street now. She and Connell have never spoken much about her father, or
about his.
Do you want me to come? Connell says. Obviously if you dont want
me there I wont go. But I wouldnt mind going, if you want.
She looks at him, and feels a certain weakening in her body.
Thank you for offering, she says. Thats kind of you.
I dont mind.
You really dont have to.
Its no bother, he says. Id like to go, to be honest.
He indicates and pulls into her gravel driveway. Her mothers car isnt
there, shes not at home. The huge white facade of the house glares down at
them. Something about the arrangement of windows gives Mariannes
house a disapproving expression. Connell switches the engine off.
Sorry I was ignoring your messages, says Marianne. It was childish.
Its alright. Look, if you dont want to be friends anymore, we dont
have to be.
Of course I want to be friends.
He nods, tapping his fingers on the steering wheel. His body is so big
and gentle, like a Labrador. She wants to tell him things. But its too late
now, and anyway it has never done her any good to tell anyone.
Alright, says Connell. Ill see you tomorrow morning at the church,
then, will I?
She swallows. Do you want to come inside for a bit? she says. We could
have a cup of tea or something.
Oh, I would, but theres ice cream in the boot.
Marianne looks around, remembering the shopping bags, and feels
disorientated suddenly.
Lorraine would kill me, he says.
Sure. Of course.
She gets out of the car then. He waves out the window. And he will
come, tomorrow morning, and he will be wearing a navy sweatshirt with a
white Oxford shirt underneath, looking innocent as a lamb, and he will
stand with her in the vestibule afterwards, not saying very much but
catching her eye supportively. Smiles will be exchanged, relieved smiles.
And they will be friends again.
Six Weeks Later
(SEPTEMBER 2012)
Hes late to meet her. The bus was caught in traffic because of some rally in
town and now hes eight minutes late and he doesnt know where the cafe
is. He has never met Marianne for coffee before. The weather is too warm
today, a scratchy and unseasonal heat. He finds the cafe on Capel Street and
walks past the cashier towards the door at the back, checking his phone. Its
nine minutes past three. Outside the back door Marianne is sitting in the
smoking garden drinking her coffee already. No one else is out there, the
place is quiet. She doesnt get up when she sees him.
Sorry Im late, he says. There was some protest on so the bus was
delayed.
He sits down opposite her. He hasnt ordered anything yet.
Dont worry about it, she says. What was the protest? It wasnt abortion
or anything, was it?
He feels ashamed now that he didnt notice. No, I dont think so, he
says. The household tax or something.
Well, best of luck to them. May the revolution be swift and brutal.
He hasnt seen her in person since July, when she came home for her
fathers Mass. Her lips look pale now and slightly chapped, and she has
dark circles under her eyes. Although he takes pleasure in seeing her look
good, he feels a special sympathy with her when she looks ill or her skin is
bad, like when someone whos usually very good at sports has a poor game.
It makes her seem nicer somehow. Shes wearing a very elegant black
blouse, her wrists look slender and white, and her hair is twisted back
loosely at her neck.
Yeah, he says. I would have a bit more energy for protesting if it was
more on the brutal side, to be honest.
You want to get beaten up by the Garda.
There are worse things than getting beaten up.
Marianne is taking a sip of coffee when he says this, and she seems to
pause for a moment with the cup at her lips. He cant tell how he identifies
this pause as distinct from the natural motion of her drinking, but he sees it.
Then she replaces the cup on the saucer.
I agree, she says.
What does that mean?
Im agreeing with you.
Have you recently been attacked by the guards or have I missed
something? he says.
She taps a little extra sugar from a sachet into her cup and then stirs it.
Finally she glances up at him as if remembering hes sitting there.
Arent you going to have coffee? she says.
He nods. Hes still feeling a little breathless after the walk from the bus,
a little too warm under his clothes. He gets up from the table and goes back
into the main room. Its cool in there and much dimmer. A woman in red
lipstick takes his order and says shell bring it right out.
*
Until April, Connell had been planning to work in Dublin for the summer
and cover the rent with his wages, but a week before the exams his boss
told him they were cutting back his hours. He could just about make rent
that way but hed have nothing left to live on. Hed always known that the
place was going to go out of business, and he was furious with himself for
not applying anywhere else. He thought about it constantly for weeks. In
the end he decided he would have to move out for the summer. Niall was
very nice about it, said the room would still be there for him in September
and all of that. What about yourself and Marianne? Niall asked. And
Connell said: Yeah, yeah. I dont know. I havent told her yet.
The reality was that he stayed in Mariannes apartment most nights
anyway. He could just tell her about the situation and ask if he could stay in
her place until September. He knew she would say yes. He thought she
would say yes, it was hard to imagine her not saying yes. But he found
himself putting off the conversation, putting off Nialls enquiries about it,
planning to bring it up with her and then at the last minute failing to. It just
felt too much like asking her for money. He and Marianne never talked
about money. They had never talked, for example, about the fact that her
mother paid his mother money to scrub their floors and hang their laundry,
or about the fact that this money circulated indirectly to Connell, who spent
it, as often as not, on Marianne. He hated having to think about things like
that. He knew Marianne never thought that way. She bought him things all
the time, dinner, theatre tickets, things she would pay for and then instantly,
permanently, forget about.
They went to a party in Sophie Whelans house one night as the exams
were ending. He knew he would finally have to tell Marianne that he was
moving out of Nialls place, and he would have to ask her, outright, if he
could stay with her instead. Most of the evening they spent by the
swimming pool, immersed in the bewitching gravity of warm water. He
watched Marianne splashing around in her strapless red swimsuit. A lock of
wet hair had come loose from the knot at her neck and was sealed flat and
shining against her skin. Everyone was laughing and drinking. It felt
nothing like his real life. He didnt know these people at all, he hardly even
believed in them, or in himself. At the side of the pool he kissed
Mariannes shoulder impulsively and she smiled at him, delighted. No one
looked at them. He thought he would tell her about the rent situation that
night in bed. He felt very afraid of losing her. When they got to bed she
wanted to have sex and afterwards she fell asleep. He thought of waking
her up but he couldnt. He decided he would wait until after his last exam
to talk to her about moving home.
Two days later, directly after his paper on Medieval and Renaissance
Romance, he went over to Mariannes apartment and they sat at the table
drinking coffee. He half-listened to her talking about some complicated
relationship between Teresa and Lorcan, waiting for her to finish, and
eventually he said: Hey, listen. By the way. It looks like I wont be able to
pay rent up here this summer. Marianne looked up from her coffee and said
flatly: What?
Yeah, he said. Im going to have to move out of Nialls place.
When? said Marianne.
Pretty soon. Next week maybe.
Her face hardened, without displaying any particular emotion. Oh, she
said. Youll be going home, then.
He rubbed at his breastbone then, feeling short of breath. Looks like it,
yeah, he said.
She nodded, raised her eyebrows briefly and then lowered them again,
and stared down into her cup of coffee. Well, she said. Youll be back in
September, I assume.
His eyes were hurting and he closed them. He couldnt understand how
this had happened, how he had let the discussion slip away like this. It was
too late to say he wanted to stay with her, that was clear, but when had it
become too late? It seemed to have happened immediately. He
contemplated putting his face down on the table and just crying like a child.
Instead he opened his eyes again.
Yeah, he said. Im not dropping out, dont worry.
So youll only be gone three months.
Yeah.
There was a long pause.
I dont know, he said. I guess youll want to see other people, then, will
you?
Finally, in a voice that struck him as truly cold, Marianne said: Sure.
He got up then and poured his coffee down the sink, although it wasnt
finished. When he left her building he did cry, as much for his pathetic
fantasy of living in her apartment as for their failed relationship, whatever
that was.
Within a couple of weeks she was going out with someone else, a friend
of hers called Jamie. Jamies dad was one of the people who had caused the
financial crisis  not figuratively, one of the actual people involved. It was
Niall who told Connell they were together. He read it in a text message
during work and had to go into the back room and press his forehead
against a cool shelving unit for almost a full minute. Marianne had just
wanted to see someone else all along, he thought. She was probably glad
hed had to leave Dublin because he was broke. She wanted a boyfriend
whose family could take her on skiing holidays. And now that she had one,
she wouldnt even answer Connells emails anymore.
By July even Lorraine had heard that Marianne was seeing someone
new. Connell knew people in town were talking about it, because Jamie had
this nationally infamous father, and because there was nothing much else
going on.
When did you two split up, then? Lorraine asked him.
We were never together.
You were seeing each other, I thought.
Casually, he replied.
Young people these days. I cant get my head around your relationships.
Youre hardly ancient.
When I was in school, she said, you were either going out with someone
or you werent.
Connell moved his jaw around, staring at the television blandly.
Where did I come from, then? he said.
Lorraine gave him a nudge of reproach and he continued to look at the
TV. It was a travel programme, long silver beaches and blue water.
Marianne Sheridan wouldnt go out with someone like me, he said.
What does that mean, someone like you?
I think her new boyfriend is a bit more in line with her social class.
Lorraine was silent for several seconds. Connell could feel his back
teeth grinding together quietly.
I dont believe Marianne would act like that, Lorraine said. I dont think
shes that kind of person.
He got up from the sofa. I can only tell you what happened, he said.
Well, maybe youre misinterpreting what happened.
But Connell had already left the room.
*
Back outside the cafe now, the sunlight is so strong it crunches all the
colours up and makes them sting. Mariannes lighting a cigarette, with the
box left open on the table. When he sits down she smiles at him through the
small grey cloud of smoke. He feels shes being coy, but he doesnt know
about what.
I dont think weve ever met for coffee before, he says. Have we?
Have we not? We must have.
He knows hes being unpleasant now but he cant stop. No, he says.
We have, she says. We got coffee before we went to see Rear Window.
Although I guess that was more like a date.
This remark surprises him, and in response he just makes some noncommittal
noise like: Hm.
The door behind them opens and the woman comes out with his coffee.
Connell thanks her and she smiles and goes back inside. The door swings
shut. Marianne is saying that she hopes Connell and Jamie get to know
each other better. I hope you get along with him, Marianne says. And she
looks up at Connell nervously then, a sincere expression which touches
him.
Yeah, Im sure I will, he says. Why wouldnt I?
I know youll be civil. But I mean I hope you get along.
Ill try.
And dont intimidate him, she says.
Connell pours a splash of milk in his coffee, letting the colour come up
to the surface, and then replaces the jug on the table.
Oh, he says. Well, I hope youre telling him not to intimidate me either.
As if you could find him intimidating, Connell. Hes shorter than I am.
Its not strictly a height thing, is it?
Seen from his point of view, she says, youre a lot taller, and youre the
person who used to fuck his girlfriend.
Thats a nice way of putting it. Is that what you told him about us,
Connells this tall guy who used to fuck me?
She laughs now. No, she says. But everyone knows.
Does he have some insecurities about his height? I wont exploit them,
Id just like to know.
Marianne lifts her coffee cup. Connell cant figure out what kind of
relationship they are supposed to have now. Are they agreeing not to find
each other attractive anymore? When were they supposed to have stopped?
Nothing in Mariannes behaviour gives him any clue. In fact he suspects
she is still attracted to him, and that she now finds it funny, like a private
joke, to indulge an attraction to someone who could never belong in her
world.
*
Back in July he went to the anniversary Mass for Mariannes father. The
church in town was small, smelling of rain and incense, with stained-glass
panels in the windows. He and Lorraine never went to Mass, hed only
been in there for funerals before. He saw Marianne in the vestibule when
he arrived. She looked like a piece of religious art. It was so much more
painful to look at her than anyone had warned him it would be, and he
wanted to do something terrible, like set himself on fire or drive his car into
a tree. He always reflexively imagined ways to cause himself extreme
injury when he was distressed. It seemed to soothe him briefly, the act of
imagining a much worse and more totalising pain than the one he really
felt, maybe just the cognitive energy it required, the momentary break in
his train of thought, but afterwards he would only feel worse.
That night, after Marianne went back to Dublin, he went out drinking
with some people from school, to Kellehers first, and then McGowans,
and then that awful nightclub Phantom around the back of the hotel. No
one was around that he had ever been really close with, and after a few
drinks he became aware that he wasnt there to socialise anyway, he was
just there to drink himself into a kind of sedated non-consciousness. He
withdrew from the conversation gradually and focused on consuming as
much alcohol as he could without passing out, not even laughing along
with the jokes, not even listening.
It was in Phantom that they met Paula Neary, their old Economics
teacher. By then Connell was so drunk that his vision was misaligned, and
beside every solid object he could see another version of the object, like a
ghost. Paula bought them all shots of tequila. She was wearing a black
dress and a silver pendant. He licked a line of salt off the back of his own
hand and saw the ghostly other of her necklace, a faint white trace on her
shoulder. When she looked at him she did not have two eyes, but several,
and they moved around exotically in the air, like jewels. He started
laughing about it, and she leaned in close with her breath on his face to ask
him what was so funny.
He doesnt remember how he got back to her house, whether they
walked or took a taxi, he still doesnt know. The place had that strange
unfurnished cleanliness that lonely houses sometimes have. She seemed
like a person with no hobbies: no bookcases, no musical instruments. What
do you do with yourself at the weekends, he remembers slurring. I go out
and have fun, she said. This struck him even at the time as deeply
depressing. She poured them both glasses of wine. Connell sat on the
leather sofa and drank the wine for something to do with his hands.
How is the football team looking this year? he said.
Its not the same without you, said Paula.
She sat beside him on the couch. Her dress had slipped down slightly,
exposing a mole over her right breast. He could have fucked her back when
he was in school. People joked about it, but they would have been shocked
if it had really happened, they would have been scared. They would have
thought his shyness masked something steely and frightening.
Best years of your life, she said.
What?
Best years of your life, secondary school.
He tried to laugh, and it came out very goofy and nervous. I dont know,
he said. Thats a sad thought if thats true.
She started to kiss him then. This seemed like a strange thing to happen
to him, unpleasant on the surface level, but also interesting in a way, as if
his life was taking a new direction. Her mouth tasted sour like tequila.
Briefly he wondered if it was legal for her to kiss him, and he concluded it
must be, he couldnt think of a reason why it wouldnt be, and yet it felt
substantially wrong. Every time he pulled away from her she seemed to
follow him forward, so that he found himself puzzled about the physics of
what was going on, and he was no longer sure whether he was sitting
upright on the sofa or reclining backwards against the arm. As an
experiment he tried to sit up, which confirmed he was in fact sitting up
already, and the small red light which he thought might have been on the
ceiling above him was just a standby light on the stereo system across the
room.
Back in school Miss Neary had made him feel so uncomfortable. But
was he mastering that discomfort now by letting her kiss him on the sofa in
her living room, or just succumbing to it? Hed hardly had time to
formulate this question when she started unbuttoning his jeans. In a panic
he tried to push her hand away, but with such an ineffectual gesture that she
appeared to think he was helping her. She got the top button undone and he
told her that he was really drunk, and maybe they should stop. She put her
hand inside the waistband of his underwear and said it was okay, she didnt
mind. He thought he would probably black out then, but he found he
couldnt. He wished he could have. He heard Paula saying: Youre so hard.
That was an especially insane thing for her to say, because he actually
wasnt.
Im going to get sick, he said.
She jerked back then, pulling her dress after her, and he took the
opportunity to stand up from the sofa and button his jeans back up.
Cautiously she asked if he was okay. When he looked at her he could make
out two separate Paulas sitting on the couch, so clearly delineated that it
was no longer obvious which was the real Paula and which the ghost.
Sorry, he said. He woke up the next day fully clothed on the floor of his
living room. He still has no idea how he made it home.
*
He must be insecure about something, says Marianne now. I dont know
what. Maybe hed like to be more cerebral.
Maybe he just has good self-esteem.
No, definitely not that. Hes 
Her eyes flick back and forth quickly. When she does this, she looks
like an expert mathematician performing calculations in her head. She sets
the coffee cup back in the saucer.
Hes what? says Connell.
Hes a sadist.
Connell stares at her across the table, simply allowing his face to
express the alarm he feels at this remark, and she gives a cute little smile.
She twists her cup around on the saucer.
Are you serious? says Connell.
Well, he likes to beat me up. Just during sex, that is. Not during
arguments.
She laughs, a stupid laugh that doesnt suit her. Connells visual field
shudders violently for a second, like the beginning of a gigantic migraine,
and he lifts a hand to his forehead. He realises he is scared. Around
Marianne he often feels somehow innocent, though really hes a lot more
sexually experienced than she is.
And youre into that, are you? he says.
She shrugs. Her cigarette is burning out in the ashtray. She picks it up
quickly and drags on it before stubbing it out.
I dont know, she says. I dont know if I really like it.
Why do you let him do it, then?
It was my idea.
Connell picks up his cup and takes a large mouthful of very hot coffee,
wanting to do something efficient with his hands. When he replaces the cup
it splashes up and spills over into the saucer.
What do you mean? he says.
It was my idea, that I wanted to submit to him. Its difficult to explain.
Well, go on and try if you want. Im interested.
She laughs again now. Its going to make you feel very awkward, she
says.
Okay.
She looks at him, maybe to see if hes joking, and then she lifts her chin
at an angle, and he knows she wont back down from telling him about it,
because that would be giving in to something she doesnt believe about
herself.
Its not that I get off on being degraded as such, she says. I just like to
know that I would degrade myself for someone if they wanted me to. Does
that make sense? I dont know if it does, Ive been thinking about it. Its
about the dynamic, more than what actually happens. Anyway I suggested
it to him, that I could try being more submissive. And it turns out he likes
to beat me up.
Connell starts coughing. Marianne picks a small wooden coffee-stirrer
out of a jar on the table and starts twisting it in her fingers. He waits for the
coughing to subside and then says: What does he do to you?
Oh, I dont know, she says. He hits me with a belt sometimes. He likes
choking me, things like that.
Right.
I mean, I dont enjoy it. But then, youre not really submitting to
someone if you only submit to things you enjoy.
Have you always had these ideas? Connell says.
She gives him a look. He