
PRAISE FOR THE TOOLS OF
ARGUMENT
In his new book The Tools of Argument: How the Best Lawyers Think, Argue, and Win, Professor
Joel Trachtman lays out the many intricacies related to how lawyers frame arguments. It is a
masterly treatment of a complex and compelling set of issues. There is much to learn here, both
for the experienced practitioner and for the novice to the field.
 James R. Silkenat, President,
American Bar Association (2012-13)
and Partner, Sullivan & Worcester
Professor Trachtmans book is required reading for lawyers, those who hire or work with
lawyers, anyone interested in understanding the dynamics of legal negotiations or of political
debate, and anyone interested in winning arguments. Its unique and practical approach strips
away jargon to isolate the core elements of legal reasoning and argumentation in a way that is
accessible and applicable in everyday situations. Non-lawyers will find it a useful guide to
effective persuasion.
 John A. Burgess, Partner, WilmerHale
Joel P. Trachtman is Professor of International Law at The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy
at Tufts University. An authority on international business and economic law, he has published
six academic books and over 80 scholarly articles, and regularly lectures at leading universities,
companies, and organizations around the world. Prior to joining the Fletcher School faculty,
Trachtman practiced law with Shearman & Sterling, a Wall Street law firm, in New York and in
Hong Kong.
THE TOOLS OF
ARGUMENT
How the Best Lawyers Think, Argue, and Win
JOEL P. TRACHTMAN
Copyright 2013 Joel P. Trachtman
All rights reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012923785 CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform North Charleston,
South Carolina
ISBN: 1481246380
ISBN 13: 9781481246385
eBook ISBN: 978-1-63003-260-9
www.toolsofargument.com
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission from the
copyright holder, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in articles or reviews.
To Lauren
Contents
Preface
1. Introduction
1.1 What Is Law?
1.2 Why Is Law Important?
1.3 What Is a Lawyer?
1.4 The Work of the Lawyer
1.5 Sophistry, Rhetoric, and Winning
1.6 The Importance of Preparation
1.7 The Power of Texts and the Incompleteness of Texts
2. Legal Thinking
2.1 The Heart of Legal Thinking: Analysis and Synthesis
2.2 The Rules of Logic and the Rules of Inference
2.3 Thinking like a (Social) Scientist
2.4 How Do You Know? Legal Epistemology
2.5 Thinking and Feeling like an Ethical Person: Procedural Justice and Substantive Justice
3. Arguing in a Legal System: Procedure
3.1 Argue About Arguing: Why Procedure Matters
3.2 Argue for Procedural Benefit: To Win on Substance, Maximize Your Procedural Advantage
3.3 Argue That Its None of the Tribunals Business: There Is No Jurisdiction
3.4 Argue That There Is Something Wrong with This Tribunal: Bias, Conflict of Interest,
Recusal, and Voir Dire
3.5 Argue for a Characterization of the Case That Makes Your Side More Appealing
3.6 Argue for Application of the Rules That Will Result in Your Victory
3.7 Argue That Your Opponent Is Wrong,Too: Counterclaims
3.8 Argue That Its None of the Complainants Business: Standing
3.9 Argue That the Complainant Is Tainted: In Pari Delictus, Tu Quoque, Clean Hands, and
Contributory Negligence
3.10 Argue That Its Too Early: Ripeness and Exhaustion of Lesser Remedies
3.11 Argue That Its Too Late: Statutes of Limitations, Prescription, and Repose
3.12 Argue That Your Opponent Must Prove His Case Before You Must Prove Yours: Burdens of
Proof
3.13 Argue That Even If the Complainant Wins, He Deserves Nothing: Remedies and
Enforcement
3.14 Argue That Its Already Been Decided: Res Judicata, Collateral Estoppel, Repose, and
Double Jeopardy
3.15 Argue That a Process Was Followed (or Flawed): Process Values Are Real Values
4. Arguing About the Meaning of Texts: Interpretation
4.1 Plain Meaning and the Dictionary
4.2 Original Intent and Evolution
4.3 Context, Purpose, and Principles
4.4 Four Corners Versus Preparatory Materials: The Parol Evidence Rule
4.5 Extensional Pruning
4.6 Interpretation Versus Construction
4.7 Interpretation and Morality
4.8 Effet Utile, the Presumption of Consistent Usage, and Meaningful Variation
4.9 Avoid Absurdity
4.10 Lex Specialis: The Assumption That the Specific Trumps the General
4.11 Expressio Unius (and Ejusdem Generis): Examples Matter
4.12 Clear Statement Rules, Interpretation Against the Draftsman, and the Rule of Lenity
4.13 Reductio Ad Absurdum, the Camels Nose, the Slippery Slope, the Parade of Horribles,
and the Thin Entering Wedge
5. Arguing From Precedent
5.1 Consistency and Law
5.2 The Salience of Precedent
5.3 Rationes Decidendi: The Essence of Decisions
5.4 Obiter Dictum and Cheap Talk
5.5 Exceptions that Swallow the Rule
5.6 Breaking Precedent
5.7 Passive Virtues and Passive Aggression: Not to Decide Is to Decide
5.8 Specificity and Delegation
5.9 Citations, Footnotes, and the Pedigree of Information
6. Arguing About Facts
6.1 Determining the Salience of Facts
6.2 Evidence and Missing Links
6.3 Causation of Harm and Negligence
6.4 Brandeis Briefs and Scientific Experts
6.5 Quality of Evidence: The Best Evidence Rule
6.6 Exclusion of Evidence
6.7 Estoppel: Blocking Argument
6.8 Presumptions: Shifting the Burden of Proof
7. Rhetorical Tricks
7.1 Non Sequitur: That Doesnt Follow
7.2 Ad Hominem Arguments: Discrediting the Source
7.3 Fallacies of Causation: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc, Affirming the Consequent, Correlation
Versus Causation, and Omitted Variable Bias
7.4 Inappropriate Inference from Limited Data
7.5 Occams Razor and the Exception That Proves the Rule
7.6 When Did You Stop Beating Your Wife? Embedding Assumptions in Questions
8. Arguing About Substantive Responsibility
8.1 The Reasonable Person and Due Diligence
8.2 Exceptional Circumstances: Force Majeure
8.3 Form Versus Substance
8.4 Law Versus Equity
8.5 Rights Versus Duties: Noses Versus Fists
8.6 Conflicting Values
9. Who Knows What Lurks in the Minds of Lawyers?
9.1 Being a Lawyer Means Never Wanting to Say Youre Sorry
9.2 Words, Words, Words: Context, Precision, and Wiggle Room
9.3 Possession is Nine Tenths of the Law, and the Facetious Golden Rule
9.4 Trees Falling in the Woods: The Importance of Observation and Evidence
9.5 Oral Agreements are Not Worth the Paper They Are Printed On
9.6 Who Knows What Evil Lurks in the Heart of Man? The Lawyer Knows
9.7 Ass-u-me Makes an Ass of You and Me
9.8 Credibility Counts: In Law and In Life
10. Winning Arguments With Reasoned Persuasion
Glossary
Preface
Have you ever been in the midst of a discussion or argument regarding business, politics, ethics,
sports, family responsibilities, or any other contentious topic and felt that your opponent did
not have the right position, but had the better argument? Why is it that some peopleoften
lawyerscan use reasoned arguments to debate with frustrating effectiveness? Perhaps you
wished that you had a greater repertoire of skills both to make your points and to counter those
put forth by your opponent. This book will help. Why not take advantage of the professionalgrade
tools of argument that have been honed through the ages in the discipline of law?
The purpose of this book is to equip law students, new lawyers, paralegals, and executives, as
well as anyone else who wants to improve their skills of reasoned persuasion, with the powerful
and time-tested tools of argument. Can you recall a time when you identified the loose thread
or logical flaw in your opponents argument, pointed it out, and felt a sense of vindication? At
that moment, you might have exclaimed to your opponent that he or she had been lawyered!1
If you liked that feelingor if you wished you had a more persuasive way to articulate your
opposing viewsthen you will enjoy and benefit from this book.
After practicing and teaching law for over 30 years, I have come to believe that the tools of
argument are remarkably valuable. Indeed, these skills are useful to all of us who engage in
small or large business dealings, legal proceedings, governmental operations, or other
negotiations, and who enjoy critical thinking, persuasive presentation of ideas, and victory in
arguments. After all, winning arguments is much more fun than losing them.
I have also come to believe that acquiring the skills and mindset to think and argue like the best
lawyers is not especially difficult. The problem has been that there are few places where one
can learn about these techniques in a form that abstracts the essential nuggets of wisdom from
their complex historical and legal contexts. Such a presentation is my goal for this book. Ive
distilled a comprehensive arsenal of the types of arguments one can make in reasoned
discourse, as well as the responsive counter-arguments. I can think of no better way to prepare
for argument than to read this book with your own settings in mind, anticipating how you can
use the tools, or how your opponent might use them, and how you can deftly respond.
Law students and prospective law students: you will find in this book a unique perspective that
will enhance your understanding of legal principles and help you participate with confidence in
classroom discussions and debates. Once you have a comprehensive and explicit framework of
the arguments and counter-arguments, you can readily see the structure of legal discourse in
briefs, cases, and classroom debate. Newly minted lawyersand even experienced legal
practitioners: I hope that you will find this book a useful refresher and checklist of the essential
tools that can greatly increase your odds of winning any dispute.
If you are not a lawyer, these argumentation skills will be helpful in both non-legal settings and
in any legal setting in which you might find yourself. (Indeed, these tools of argument are too
valuable to be left solely in the hands of the lawyers.) Further, this book will shed light on the
structure of the legal system, which is the principal structure in the U.S. and in other rule-oflaw-
based societies for making public policy and for assigning private responsibility, thus helping
you become more engaged and knowledgeable citizens. A large proportion of the news of the
day has a legal dimension, and you will undoubtedly understand more if you have a sense of the
types of arguments that are used.
Of course, in some social and interpersonal settings, it will be unseemly or even dangerous to
think and argue like a lawyer, as most lawyers eventually learn by painful experience. Dont try
arguing to someone to whom you are romantically attracted that you have a right to their
reciprocal affection, or that they bear the burden of proving that you are not attractive to them.
But it is good to know the techniques because, on balance, they will be useful to you in a variety
of waysperhaps in the context of convincing a business colleague of the right strategy,
compelling a supplier to comply with its obligations, obtaining a refund for a defective product,
securing insurance coverage for a needed medical treatment, or persuading the local youth
soccer director to reinterpret a league rule. Consider: is there an issue of precedent? Was an
agreed-upon process followed? Does the decision-maker have appropriate jurisdiction?
I believe in the importance of learning these skills because they workthey make a difference
in winning or losing in the war of words. After all, these techniques of argumentation have
evolved and survived over the course of many centuries because they have inherent, compelling
logic. People respond to these arguments not because a speaker is overbearing, manipulative,
or charismatic, but because they see the logic of the argument. Surprising as it may seem, legal
logic is real logic, not separate from other types of logic. If you can bring this compelling logic to
bear in legal, business, and interpersonal settings, you can be more persuasive. This book is
designed to help you do just that.
1
Introduction
What is the difference between lawyers and the rest of us? There is no lawyer gene that makes
some folks more argumentative, precise, or abrasive, than others. The distinctive professional
characteristic of lawyers is a critical method of thinking and of argument that has a number of
components. This book sets out these components, and thereby demystifies this method of
thinking and argument.
This book is concerned with the techniques of argumentof persuasionused by lawyers. The
domain of these techniques is not limited to the legal system, but they were developed within
the legal system, and they are used intensively within it. One of my goals is to convince you that
these techniques are logical and reasonable, even when they have a result that may seem
counterintuitive or unjust.
In order to see the power and utility of these techniques, it is necessary first to consider the
legal system, and to understand why these techniques of thinking and argument make sense
within that system. I know you want to get to the arguments, but bear with me. I will make this
brief, and the material presented in this chapter will serve as important context and preparation
for acquiring the skills of analysis and argument presented afterwards.
1.1 What Is Law?
There are all sorts of responses to the question what is law? One type of law is reasonably
easy to identify. Statutes produced by legislatures are definitely laws. But there are other types
of law, and the things we call law can have varying characteristics. Regulations issued by
regulatory agencies can have the power of law, and in a common law system like the U.S.,
judicial decisions can make new law. Indeed, one of the things that lawyers do in response to
rules asserted by opponents is to examine the rules pedigree: where did this rule come from,
what was the authority of its author, and does it have sway over this case?
A pat response to the question what is law is law is what judges apply to disputes. This
response may work for the incurious layman, but two groups might be left dissatisfied. First,
judges cannot rely on this aphorism. They need to know how to decide what they will apply.
Second, those seeking to comply with and utilize the law, including but not limited to lawyers,
need to know in advance of adjudication, which rules are part of the system and which are not.
Legal philosophers and social scientists continue to struggle to define law, but a good working
definition of law is the following: formal rules that carry the sanction of the state.2 Sure, there
are a lot of questions and peripheral issues. What about religious law, or the rules of EBay, or
the rules of the National Basketball Association (NBA)? The answer is that it is good to
distinguish between circumstances where these non-state rules carry the sanction of the state
and circumstances where they do not. In some places, religious law can carry the sanction of
the state, and the rules of EBay or the NBA can take advantage of the power of the state if they
are incorporated in binding contracts. It is important to note, though, that the techniques of
argument set forth in this book are also useful in connection with the rules of EBay, the NBA,
and other non-state rule-makers.
So, we might think of law as a set of formal rules that carry the sanction of the state. Then, legal
argumentation is argumentation about the content and application of these rulesabout when
and how each of us can invoke the force of the state. As you can readily see, a lot is at stake.
1.2 Why Is Law Important?
As Tina Turner famously sang, Whats law got to do with it? 3 Where does law fit in to our
society? First, law gives us securitysecurity that we will not be killed, hurt, robbed or
otherwise treated illegally. The force of the state is deployed to restrain the force of individuals.
This security allows us to carry out productive activities and to enjoy life without expending
excessive resources on maintaining our security. Legal argument and analysis helps us to
determine what protections are available to us.
Second, law facilitates relationships in our increasingly complex society. We live in a dense
society with complicated relationships and complex production of complex goods and services.
While this complexity sometimes is dispiriting, it allows us to have efficient production and to
have a better material life. Law, along with other rules, helps us to manage complexity. It allows
us to have more complex relationships, allowing us to be more productive.
Law, like taxes in the words of the great judge Oliver Wendell Holmes, is the price of civilization.
Thats why law is important to society generally, but why is it important to you?
It is important for you to know the protections available to you against harm to your person,
your property, or your organization, and to be able to advocate for yourself in these regards.
Law is concerned with the allocation of responsibility, and you will from time to time need to
argue with others about their responsibilities, as well as about yours.
By complying with the law, you will avoid the costly application of the force of the state. By
seeking to have the law apply to those with whom you disagree, you can bring to bear on them
the force of the state in order to cause them to behave properly and to keep their promises.
Thus, the force of the state will be applied, in accordance with the law, to prevent violence,
theft, fraud, and other bad and inefficient behaviors. Law is important because it establishes the
terms under which the state will apply its forceby which society has agreed through the state
and the law how the coercive power of the state can be used.
This is why novelist Mario Puzo has Don Corleone, The Godfather, say, A lawyer with his
briefcase can steal more than a hundred men with guns. The lawyer has in his briefcase the
texts that will determine who wins and who loses. These textscontracts, statutes,
constitutions, and treatiesare not just words, but words that carry the force of the state.
Therefore, the lawyer has in his briefcase, properly used, the force of the state, which in most
places is stronger than a hundred men with guns.
Law is a central tool and structure of the state. In Shakespeares Henry VI, Part 2, Dick the
Butcher, in connection with plans for a revolt, says, The first thing we do, lets kill all the
lawyers. Dick sees the killing of lawyers as a way to destroy state authority (not, as is
commonly thought, as a way to improve society more generally). But a more appealing method
of rebellion, at least for non-lawyers, is to destroy not state authority but the lawyers
monopoly on control over state authority by learning to think and argue as they do. This book
advances that cause. Legal argument is too powerful, and the force of law in society too
important, to be left in the exclusive hands of lawyers.
Legal rules are formal rules, established according to constitutional procedures, that carry the
force of the state. Law is important because, in a society based on the rule of law, it channels
the force of the state. This is why society has developed such sophisticated techniques for
arguing over the application of law.
1.3 What Is a Lawyer?
A lawyer is an expert. The expertise that the lawyer wields is twofold. First, it includes
knowledge of how the legal system workshow all the written and unwritten procedural rules
apply to guide the determination and application of the law. Much of this book is concerned
with these procedural rules. Second, the lawyers expertise includes substantive rules of law,
like the rules protecting patented technology or forbidding the sale of cocaine.
Even though law is a field in which expert knowledge is necessary to operate at the highest
level, it is open to the layperson to know some of the procedural and substantive rulesthe
difference between the layperson and the expert is in the scope and depth of the experts
knowledge. This book cannot address the substantive rules of law in any detail, and it cannot
make you a lawyer. However, it will educate you about many of the techniques of argument and
written and unwritten procedural rulesrules about the determination and application of
substantive rulesthat form the distinctive expertise of the lawyer.
1.4 The Work of the Lawyer
The core work of the lawyer is not to argue about what the law should be, although this
sometimes is salient. Rather, the work of the lawyer is to argue about and determine what the
applicable law is, what the facts are, and how the facts fit into the applicable law. These
questions are complex enough, but as you will see in this book, the individual tools used in
argument are not as complicated or demanding as those used in neurosurgery or rocket
science. They are accessible to all. But choosing the right arrows from the lawyers quarrelsome
quiver and fitting them together elegantly to craft an overall argument that will persuade the
decision-maker takes strategic thinking, and creativity.
In general terms, we can say that lawyers analyze and argue about what the rules are and how
they apply to particular situations. The ways that lawyers think, argue, and eventually win
arguments are relevant to dealings in business, in politics, in church, in the military, in sports, or
in other institutions or relationships.
1.5 Sophistry, Rhetoric, and Winning
Its great to be persuasive when youre right. Its great to be able to resist sophistry when your
opponent is wrong. It is a guilty pleasure to be persuasive when you are wrong.
Lawyers are the modern heirs of the ancient Greek sophists, the worst of whom sought to
make the weaker argument appear the stronger. The first way to define strength in this
context is by how well you persuade your audience. If, however, a strong argument, as defined
here, were one that convinces others of your position, then it would be impossible to make the
weaker argument appear stronger. By appearing stronger, it would be stronger. Therefore, we
need a different definition of strength than mere persuasiveness.
The true stronger argument is the argument that meets some objective test of strength, and
that should win. But, you might ask, where does this objective test come from? Is it based on
first principles, justice, or truth? Unfortunately, as culturally-biased human beings, we often
disagree about first principles, justice, and truth. A more practical version of this second
definition would deem stronger the argument that is more substantively appealingthe one
that resounds more greatly in logic and policy. By making the weaker argument in this sense
appear the stronger, lawyers or other sophists may subvert first principles, truth, or public
policy. In order to make the weaker argument appear the stronger, they might be required to
present arguments falsely. Sophistry is thus ethically unappealing.
Lawyers are trained to think in terms of legal right and legal wrong (which is one of the things
that people find objectionable about them). If the law says you are responsible for a problem,
then for the lawyer, thats the end of the discussion. But in a more nuanced social and relational
setting, things are not always so black and white, and the legal system can ignore important
shadings of right and wrong. This is not necessarily a bad thing. Sometimes decisions must be
made, even if they are imperfect and even if there is a degree of right on both sides. However, it
is good to remember that there is significant nuance. Sometimes it is also politic to recognize
the values that motivated the losing claim and even to compromise when you would otherwise
win in formal dispute settlement procedure.
Legal practice is, to a great extent, ethically ambivalent. Lawyers pledge to represent their
clients zealously, and so they are charged, where their client is wrong, with trying to make the
weaker argument appear the stronger. Yet, they also see themselves as officers of the court, or
agents of the state, and in that role they should seek to enforce the law as intended and must
act honestly.
This book is not intended to school sophists. But it does include a taxonomy of the tools of
sophistry so that they can be identified and countered. While it is far beyond the ambit of this
book to postulate a set of objective criteria or a set of first principles for use in judging
arguments, it is within its scope to promote truth in argument. In the U.S., we like to think that
our system of legal advocacy is a crucible that forges accurate application of law. In a broader
social setting, you might acknowledge that competent and honest argument over the
application of rules, principles, and policy will allow fair decisions to prevail.
Understanding the tools of argument will allow you to be more persuasive, to counter the
arguments of opponents, and to make decisions when you are the target of persuasive
arguments. The best tools of argument are also tools of thinking and will enable us to persuade
the most important decision-makersourselvesas to what is right.
1.6 The Importance of Preparation
In legal practice, as in non-legal argumentation, preparation is everything. As you review the
arguments presented in this book, you will see that by evaluating each of the components of
your position, and of your opponents, you will be able to see which arguments are available to
you and which are available to your opponent. You will be able to maximize the strength of your
arguments and you will be able to prepare with responses to those of your opponent.
Unfortunately, greater preparation can also make the weaker argument appear the stronger.
This book provides many possible lines of argument and suggests ways to counter each
argument: points and counterpoints. If you maximize your points and prepare with
counterpoints by which to oppose your opponents points, you maximize your chance of
winning on points. Winners in every sport, and in every other area of competition, know that
preparation maximizes the chances of success.
Good preparation consists of considering your facts and the applicable rules, and of thinking
about the ways in which each argument described in this book may be applied, either to
support your side, or to support that of your opponent.
1.7 The Power of Texts and the Incompleteness of Texts
Law is primarily composed of written rules. While there are important unwritten rules, and
lawyers play a critical role in arguing about what those rules are, most of the work of lawyers is
concerned with written rules. Written rules, produced by a government as laws, or produced by
private parties as contracts or other rules, are best understood as a specification about how
people will behave in the future, or at least about the consequences of certain behavior in the
future.
The important point here is the temporal one. Laws (and contracts) are prepared in advance to
control later behavior. Legislation is the mechanism by which societies agree in advance about
what to do to prevent or affect specified behavior. This is a valuable mechanism, allowing
societies to overcome cooperation problems so that they can create public goods or prevent
individuals from doing harm to one another. Law is essential to our character as a social animal
and to humanitys ability to improve its welfare.
All laws, and all contracts, are inevitably incomplete. They cannot be written in advance
specifically to anticipate every possible circumstance. Courts or other decision-making
mechanisms may be assigned the job of completing the contract or the legislation ex post.
Other times there is no legal or contractual rule to applya gap in our structure of rules. In
these cases, the law or contract cannot affect behavior or impose penalties, and any loss
remains where it falls.
2
Legal Thinking
What does it mean to think like a lawyer? You might suppose that you have to go to law
school to find out. Having been to law school, practiced law for a decade, and taught law for
more than two, I believe that I can convey in this brief book the essence of thinking like a
lawyer, what I like to call the art of reasoned persuasion. Sure, there is much to learn in law
school to prepare people for the legal profession, but the experience can fall short in
empowering students with these critical thinking skills. Unfortunately, some law schools fail to
do a good job teaching, and some law students fail to do a good job learning, how to think like a
lawyer. Therefore, it is neither necessary nor sufficient to attend law school in order to acquire
these essential tools.
Law school has three main educational components. First, a large part of law school in common
law countries, like the U.S., is devoted to learning to argue about whether a given precedent
governs a new fact situation. Second, much of the time in law school is spent learning the
specifics of particular legal rules and how to look up particular legal rules. Third, a great deal of
modern law school education in the U.S. is devoted to learning what the law should beto
normative thinking about the law.
Regarding the latter point, although law schools are improving, the techniques taught there for
determining what the law should be are generally inferior to the techniques available in other
disciplines, such as economics or philosophy. After all, economics offers the strongest social
scientific tools of empirical evaluation of the results of legal rules, while philosophy offers the
strongest analytical tools for evaluation of moral goals.
While this book conveys the essence of thinking and arguing like a lawyer, I must concede that I
only learned most of what this book contains after law school. In law school, most of the tools
of legal thinking and argumentation presented in this book are only addressed incidentally or
indirectly. As a law professor now, I daresay that if I had read this book before law school, I
would have had a more complete set of tools of legal analysis than some of my professors. I
know that if I had read this book upon the beginning of my practice of law, I would have had a
more complete set of tools of analysis than most of the lawyers with whom I tangled.
The skill of thinking like a lawyer and the tools of argument draw from a variety of law school
studies and legal practice. It involves an analytical understanding of rules, evidence, and logical
inferences. It is both rational and ruthless. It fixates deliberately on airtight problem solving
for the question: how can I convince a decision-maker that I should win?
This book synthesizes what it means to think and argue like a lawyer. The skills presented
include a number of identifiable and discrete components that, individually, are rather simple.
When combined artfully, they allow you to construct a formidable argument. I describe these
skills in clear and accessible terms, with examples. My goal is to enable you to adapt them to
real life situations any time that you are arguing about principles, rules, facts, or agreements.
The utility of these tools of argument is by no means limited to courtroom or other legal
settings.
2.1 The Heart of Legal Thinking: Analysis and Synthesis
Here is where I reveal the main mode of thinking like a lawyer. Drum roll, please. We call it
analysis and synthesis. Lawyers break legal questions down into components, or elements, of
a crime or of a claim, and then analyze each component separately. So, if the elements of the
crime of murder include intent, causation, death, and lack of excuse, we analyze each of these
components separately and then synthesize the analyses for a complete understanding.
Its not rocket science, folks. But it does differ from what may be the laypersons approach,
which is to reach a conclusion less through the discrete analysis of components, but more
holistically or impressionistically. The layperson might conclude thats murder or thats theft
or thats fraud in the sense of common parlance, without going through the analytical steps
required by law. Behavioral scientists have confirmed that human beings, more than wed like to
admit, reach conclusions first and analyze later. The legal discipline is attractive where it can
slow things down and allow us to think analytically before reaching a conclusion.
This style of analysis and synthesis is also the secret of good legal writing. In the first paragraph,
or section, of your argument, break the crime or claim into elements: analyze the claim. In
subsequent paragraphs or chapters, examine each element separately to determine whether it
is factually satisfied. Once you are finished, it is easy to synthesize or look at all the elements
and see whether they comprise the crime or claim in question. This is the concluding paragraph
or chapter. Yes, it is dry and stylistically predictable, but its beauty is in the elegance of its
function. Good legal writing, like other expository writing, should be parsimoniousincluding
precisely what is necessary to reach the conclusion, and nothing more.
All legal prohibitions or requirements, including those in a contract, take the logical form of ifthen
statements: if x, y, and z, then a. The initial analytical question simply asks if what?
What is included in the if portion of the if-then statement? The answer is that those are the
elements of the crime or claim, or of the contractual obligation. In order to determine if what,
we simply read the law or contract and determine what conditions it specifies for the relevant
legal consequences. Once we know the elements, we know what goes in the if portion. The
law specifies the consequences: the then portion.
This analytical method is iterative and inductivewe dont know which potential if-then
statements to consult until we see if some of the ifs are satisfied. We look at those if-then
statements that are potentially satisfied by the facts we initially identify, and then pursue an
evaluation to see if they are indeed fully satisfied.
This is not different from a doctor using differential diagnosis to determine the disease that
afflicts a patient. The doctor evaluates the patients condition and narrows the diagnosis as
she sequentially adds to the factual elements. Just as the doctor asks first, does the patient
complain, second, does the patient have a fever, third, is the patient coughing, etc., until she
comes up with a diagnosis, so does the lawyer use a similar technique to come up with a claim.
Of course, it may be that the doctor finds no disease, or the lawyer finds no claim, because all of
the elements of any known disease or claim are not satisfied.
For example, for legal responsibility for a civil (non-criminal) wrong, or tort, there must be (i) a
duty, (ii) a violation of that duty, (iii) causing (iv) harm (v) to a person owed the duty, (vi) where
there is no defense such as necessity or contributory negligence. If each of these conditions is
met, then there is legal liability for the tort.
Thus, legal analysis consists of (a) breaking down each legal rule into a list and (b) evaluating
whether each condition is met so as to result in legal responsibility. Importantly, the elements
are generally linked conjunctively; if any condition is not satisfied, legal responsibility does not
result.
Analysis and synthesis answer every question regarding whether an act violates the law or is
required by law. The analysis breaks the prohibition or requirement into component conditions
then sequentially evaluates whether each condition is met. The synthesis merely observes
whether each condition is met. Its simple.
If you can learn to do thisif you can recognize the factual parameters of each rule and then
address the definitional and factual difficulties of each parameterthen you are already well on
your way to thinking like a lawyer.
By the way, well-written laws and contracts make it easy to identify the component conditions
of responsibility; the clearest documents will specify them explicitly. Good legal drafting consists
of clarity in expression of legal obligations, and legal obligations are always formulated as ifthen
statements. Good drafting identifies the if conditions clearly and should specify the
then result with precision. As you review any legal document, your main concern should be
whether these if-then statements are clear and if they do what you need them to do.
Following is an example of good drafting following an if-then formulation:
If Party A suffers any losses as a result of environmental contamination of Property X arising
from actions of Party B, then Party B shall compensate Party A for the full amount of such
losses.
Thus, the components of a claim for compensation under this provision are (i) losses (ii)
suffered by Party A (iii) as a result of environmental contamination (iv) of Property X (v) arising
from actions of Party B.
Of course, analysis is not exclusive to lawyers. In ordinary social life, we might ask whether an
associate or friend has lied to us. In order to do so, we might ask ourselves, what are the
components of lying? Lets say that in your community (we will stay out of the legal system for
now) the consensus-based components are the following: (i) the alleged liar must speak, (ii) the
speech must be false, (iii) the speaker must know that it is false, (iv) the false speech must be
intended to hurt another, and (v) the false speech must actually hurt another.
We all know about difficulties with some of these components. Is a white lie (where no one is
hurt, or where no hurt is intended) a lie? Is silence in the face of anothers misapprehension of
the facts a lie? The best analytical approach is to determine the elements that are required and
then to determine whether each element is present. In a legal system, a legislator determines
which elements are required, while a court determines whether each element is present.
2.2 The Rules of Logic and the Rules of Inference
Lawyers make formal arguments in court and elsewhere. A formal argument needs to be
consistent with formal logic, and it needs to begin with a base of knowledge and build from
there, using the rules of logic or the rules of inference.
So, in order to think like a lawyer, you need to know how to think. Surprising, eh? This book
does not provide a deliberate introduction to formal logic, but it does point out some of the
basic fallacies that can plague argument or hide the perfidy of sophists.
The rules of inference, drawn from all the sciencesall the ways in which we know thingsare
the customary or consensus-accepted methodological conventions that tell us whether it is
permissible to draw a factual inference based on a certain quantity or quality of data. For
example, statisticians and econometricians have a highly developed set of rules of inference
that they use in their work. These rules can seem arbitrary, but they have been accepted by
consensus as a useful basis for discourse.
We must recall that it is a social choice whether the legal process, or any other decision-making
process, will simply accept these rules of inference. (The rules of logic are pretty, well,
irrefutable.) For example, as you know, we have standards of proof in law for certain things; in
the U.S., conviction of a crime requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt. This is a higher
standard than that which we might use in our daily lives for determining whether someone is a
criminal.
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is a different standard from that which might be applied by
a statistician to determine the likelihood of a causal relationship. Actually, statistical analysis has
trouble with causal relationships, but can show interesting correlative relationships.
For example, statistical evidence can show how the likelihood of contracting lung cancer
increases if one smokes. But it does not show how, or even show directly that, smoking causes
cancer. Correlative relationships are circumstantial evidence, which we sometimes disdain,
but circumstantial evidence can still be useful in reasoned arguments. You may have seen a
television or film courtroom drama in which a lawyer discounts evidence that is merely
circumstantial, but the truth is that circumstantial evidence is often a good, if not irrefutable,
basis for inference. Much of what we know is based on circumstantial evidence.
In fact, a statistician might ask what this beyond a reasonable doubt standard of proof
meanshow would you quantify this level of probability? The often-used convention of
statistical significance states that if there is less than (choose one) a 5% or 10% possibility that
an observed correlation is just random chance, it will be deemed statistically significant. If
analysis shows that the correlation is stronger than the selected level of statistical significance,
does this mean that the correlation has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt? Arent
statisticians the consummate reasonable people?
Most of us would answer that we seldom can reduce evidence of a crime to statistical
measurementsthere are multiple pieces of evidence, each with different significance or
weight. Even if we could measure the probability of crime statistically, we might feel
uncomfortable doing so. But the response to this discomfort is to ask whether the discretion
retained by not specifying a quantitative threshold is consistent with the idea of the rule of law,
which is defined as the absence, or at least the minimization, of human discretion.
2.3 Thinking like a (Social) Scientist
The analysis/synthesis method outlined above is applicable to all determinations of whether
there is a violation of the law, or whether there is a violation of a duty under contract or a tort,
giving rise to a claim. However, it is wholly inapplicable in connection with arguments about
what the law should be.
In fact, the greatest single revolution in legal research in the last 50 years has been the
development of the field of law and economics, bringing social scientific methodologies to bear
on policy questions about the law. This study asks questions about the empirical results of legal
rules, as well as asking how legal rules come to be made. Law schools have increasingly
recognized that the traditional disciplinary tools of law can be greatly enhanced by
incorporating other social scientific disciplines when the goal is to create or evaluate public
policy.
The field of law provides no insight into whether there should be a minimum wage, whether
capital gains should be taxed at a lower rate, whether capital punishment is a good idea, or how
long a prison sentence should be. Economists, philosophers, sociologists, and other experts
have better tools to respond to these types of questions.
Nevertheless, in the U.S., and in many other countries, lawyers have a leading role in
government, including in legislation and regulation. And experienced lawyers can indeed be
helpful in evaluating the mechanics of a particular law. For example, they can evaluate whether
courts or other decision-makers will be able to determine the different components accurately
or not, or whether a rule can be applied consistently.
2.4 How Do You Know? Legal Epistemology
One of the best responses to any argument, of any kind, is simply to ask, How do you know?
Putting your opponent to his proof can be an effective strategy. By asking, How do you know,
we are implicitly saying that it is the opponents job to supply proof rather than our job to
supply contradictory evidence. We are implicitly shifting the burden of proof.
We need to be careful what we ask because the proponent may be prepared with
overwhelming evidence, but, more often than not, there may be gaps in the chain of logic or
evidence. Once we find a gap, we just need to attack it until the entire argument falls. My late
colleague, Keith Highet, one of the United States greatest practicing international lawyers,
referred to this as the loose thread strategy: pull on it and the fabric of your opponents
argument unravels. Highet was a bulldog who would clamp the opponents loose thread in his
teeth and pull viciously and happily.
However, the most persuasive arguments set out preemptively, or otherwise make available,
how the author knows that each proposition is true. That is, the most persuasive arguments
answer in advance the how do you know question by setting out the pedigree of each
proposition. This strategy of full disclosure is less advisable where your positions are weak. But
when they are strong it can shock and awe your opponent into submission. There is no more
satisfactory feeling than to do your homework, lay out the arguments, and have your opponent
concede that he cannot honestly hold back your tsunami of argument. Where your arguments
are this good, it is often strategically advisable to lay them out in detail, even though doing so
gives your opponent a chance to respond.
This is why lawyers love footnotes. A good footnote preempts argument by showing the
support for the proposition. It allows the decision-maker to see how well supported the
argument is. Legal argument even has a particular set of rules for citation that is intended to
discipline and guide the use of references. These rules require a degree of disclosure of the kind
of support provided by the material cited. It establishes a set of rules of the game regarding
how we assert the pedigree of our knowledge.
However, preemptive display of the basis for your arguments provides an opportunity for your
opponent to scrutinize those arguments for flaws. Thus, where your opponent sees that there is
no footnote or other display of the pedigree of your information, or where the footnote shows
weak support, he can seek to exploit your weakness. In reasoned argument, you always have a
strategic choice whether to make preemptive display of your back up in citations or not, often
depending on the context and the opportunity you will have to provide the support later.
On the other hand, where your opponent fails to set out the pedigree of his propositions, or
where, after examining the pedigree of his propositions for yourself, you otherwise identify a
weakness, you must put him to his proof. Following Highets strategy, you must pull on that
loose thread and ask why we should believe this unsupported proposition. In a more nuanced
way, you must test the quality of the pedigree of each of your opponents essential
propositionssome may purport to be well supported, but may actually be weakly supported,
or even contradicted. Facts can be appreciated in different ways, and support for a proposition
is often in the eye of the beholder.
There are two types of knowledge that are important in law: knowledge of facts and knowledge
of law. While lawyers may be adept at proving or disproving factual statements, the more
characteristic part of legal practice involves determining what the law is. Importantly, there is an
iterative, interdependent, relationship between law and facts. The facts that we identify tell us
what legal rules are likely to be applicable, and the legal rules tell us what facts are salient. For
example, we do not know whether to examine the law of murder unless someone has died and
we suspect improper causation: what is known in pre-modern detective stories as foul play.
Once we see death and improper causation, we can look at the law of murder to see whether
this is a case of murder.
The crime of murder has several factual elements that must be proven in order to convict the
perpetrator. If one of the factual elements cannot be proven, another legal rule might apply. For
example, if there was no bad intent on the part of the person who caused the death, we might
examine the crime of manslaughter, or the civil wrong (tort) of wrongful death. If there was
bad intent, but no death, we might examine attempted murder or assault as possible crimes.
Again, once we know some of the facts, we know where to look. Creative lawyers are those who
are able to identify elements of crimes or causes of action that may not readily fit together or
be perceived as a particular crime or cause of action.
2.5 Thinking and Feeling like an Ethical Person: Procedural Justice and Substantive
Justice
This is a favorite game of the law professor: to bait an unsuspecting law student into explaining
how a particular legal outcome is just. You should decline to attempt to defend that ground:
the answer to the professor is that the legal outcome may well be unjust, at least in terms of
substantive justice. Mere legal rules can never hope to achieve more than an approximation of
substantive justice, and determining an outcomes justice is not part of the legal profession. (It
is the duty of each of us as citizens, but that is not the subject of this book.)
More importantly, in a liberal (democratic, rule-of-law-based) system that accepts a variety of
visions of substantive justice, the actual law that is legislated can be seen as a compromise
among these varying visions. In a liberal system, we each accept that individuals may have
varying visions of substantive justice, but it is still valuable to be able to make laws even though
they, by necessity, fulfill some individuals vision of substantive justice and deny others. On the
other hand, in a religious law system in which the religion purports to know the details of
substantive justice, all the law needs to do is to follow the religious vision and it will comport
with substantive justice. Law that does not accept the possibility of diversity of values is, by
definition, illiberal.
Therefore, in liberal societies, law is understood to be separate from ethics and not necessarily
congruent with justice. But why is ethical argument different from legal argument? In brief,
ethical argument addresses the question of what should be, or what we should do, while legal
argument generally addresses a wholly different question.
Legal argument addresses the question of how we agreed earlierin law or in contractto
address the problem that has now arisen. It addresses the question of how the law governs the
matter at hand rather than how the law should have been formulated to do so. So, legal analysis
is different from both public policy analysis and ethical analysis.
Some may observe that this focus on what was agreed, instead of what is right, is
fundamentally unjust. However, in a liberal system, individuals have implicitly or explicitly
agreed that no one has a clear and infallible vision of justice. There simply is no accepted
Archimedean point from which to measure justice. Rather, individuals in a rule-of-law-based
society have implicitly or explicitly agreed to accept the outcomes of the constitutional and legal
process, because they have come to a belief that this system provides as well as possible a
compromise among varying individual visions of justice.
This liberal perspective suggests that the procedural justice reflected in adherence to the
system outweighs a particular vision of substantive justice. When U.S. Supreme Court nominees
traditionally testify at their confirmation hearings that they will apply the law as written and will
not engage in judicial legislation, they are pledging allegiance to these procedural justice
values and foreswearing the application of their own vision of substantive justice.
Fragile as reason is and limited as law is as the expression of the institutionalized medium of reason, thats all we
have standing between us and the tyranny of mere will and the cruelty of unbridled, unprincipled, undisciplined
feeling.
Justice Felix Frankfurter, 1962
3
Arguing in a Legal System:
Procedure
Consider the implications of the prior sub-section: the law itself may be inconsistent with
substantive justiceit may be inconsistent with what you or I believe is right. The idea that we
have a legal system rather than a system that simply says, Do what is right in each
circumstance, represents a recognition that we must compromise about what we think may be
right in order to live in a society with others who have varying visions of what is right.
Therefore, argument within a legal system is different from argument outside, because the legal
system is sympathetic to certain arguments that would not meet as great a welcome outside
the legal system, and because it discounts other arguments that would be more appealing
outside the legal system. To a great extent, the legal system itself sets the rules about what
kinds of arguments will be successful within that system. The legal system is partially
independent of the society in which it operates. Although a legal system is rooted in the values
of its society, it also has an independent dynamic, with principles, language, and rules of its
own.
Furthermore, all legal systems vary from one another. So, the French legal system and the
Islamic legal system differ from the U.S. legal system, and the U.S. tax law system differs from
the U.S. contract law system.
In particular, the concept of procedure is paramount to arguments that are founded in a legal
system. In this chapter, I present fifteen tools of argument related to procedure and explain why
using them can help you win.
But the critical point here is that the nature of a legal system is different from the nature of
other types of social systems. This book focuses on the types of arguments that are
characteristic of legal systems. And yet, because these arguments may also be understood as
natural, human arguments, which respond to ordinary logic, and which are based on common
realities of social structure, it is not surprising that these arguments resonate and are useful in
non-legal contexts as well.
3.1 Argue About Arguing: Why Procedure Matters
You may be familiar with the story about the Vietnam War Paris peace talks in 1972-1973, in
which much of the preliminary negotiations were concerned with the shape of the table around
which the discussions would take place. While this particular negotiation was imbued with great
symbolic value, and therefore had important outcome-determinative consequences, other
procedural decisions often have direct outcome-determinative consequencesthey may decide
who wins and who loses. Knowing this, lawyers will argue fiercely about procedural decisions.
They do so after a process of backward induction in which they determine how the procedural
decision will affect their chances of winning.
For example, lawyers know that in an interstate or international case, there is a question as to
what is the applicable law: the law of party As home (say, Kansas), the law of party Bs home
(say, Japan), the law of the place where the transaction occurred (say, France), or something
else. They also know that different courts have different approaches to determining which law
to apply. Furthermore, different bodies of law may have sharply different approaches to
determining responsibility. Depending on which court you are in, one law might apply as
opposed to another, and the law that applies could determine who wins. The plaintiff usually
gets a first shot at determining where the case will be brought, and sophisticated plaintiffs will
choose the court that will apply the law that will result in their victory. The process of figuring
out ones preferred court is what lawyers call forum-shopping.
The following hypothetical decision tree shows how this process of backward induction would
work. The plaintiff has a choice of suing in Kansas, Japanese, or French courts. Japanese and
Kansas courts would each apply their own methods of choosing the applicable law, but we will
assume that both their methods would result in the application of French law. The French court
would apply a different method of choosing the applicable law, which we will assume would
result in the application of Kansas law. The plaintiff believes that it has a very good chance of
winning if Kansas law is applied and a very good chance of losing if French law is applied. So,
once it completes this analysis, the plaintiff tries to bring the case in a French court. If the
defendant sees the same picture, it fights the plaintiffs choice of a French court.
Process and substance are intertwined, and often inseparable. If your opponent has the better
substantive argument, counter with procedural arguments that can change the substantive
rules or that can make your opponents argument more difficult to make.
3.2 Argue for Procedural Benefit: To Win on Substance, Maximize Your Procedural
Advantage
Good lawyers, like good athletes, know that small sources of advantage are important. Each of
those small sources of advantage makes our chances of winning greater, and if there are a lot of
them, they make our chances of winning much greater. Such advantages on a tennis court
wouldnt turn me into Novak Djokovic. But they do increase my chances of winning against my
likely opponents. And certainly when the greatest players compete, each seeks every small
source of advantage. Superstar lawyers are no different. You achieve superstar status by seeking
every small source of advantage and assembling these multiple small advantages into
dominance.
Point: You have done something wrong.Counterpoint: The procedure that you
propose to follow, or have followed, in determining that I have done something
wrong is unfair or otherwise defective.
Virtually any decision can be attacked on the basis that the process by which it was made was
somehow defective, including providing insufficient opportunity for a party to be heard.
Conversely, lawyers know that if they want to make a decision stickmake it effectivethey
will need to follow an acceptable procedure. If the decision is likely to benefit you, make sure
that the procedure by which it is made is good in order to safeguard the expected results.
Lets say that your colleague at work has made a decision to invest in a new piece of equipment.
If you disagree, you can attack the substance of the decision. But you might begin, and you
might get a more sympathetic hearing, by attacking first the process by which the decision was
made. Were all the appropriate parties consulted, were the right return on investment analyses
done, and so on?
For a different example, lets assume for a moment that you have committed what looks like
theft: you walked into a store, put an item in your pocket, failed to pay for it, and left the store,
all intentionally. What more is there to say? In a legal system, as compared to common
perception and parlance, there is actually a lot more to say. For a layperson, this can be a source
of puzzlement, or even anger. Sometimes we are disappointed to see a criminal get off on a
technicality.
These technicalities often reflect important social values, and so it should not come as too great
a surprise that we sometimes allow the concern for the so-called technicality to overcome the
concern for substantive justice. Many of these technicalities come under the constitutional and
human rights heading of due process. These technicalities may be hard-won protections of
fundamental liberties and are established to protect the honest citizen or loyal political
dissenter as much as the horrid criminal. Thus, there are circumstances where the legal system
imposes limits based on systemic values that are additional to, and separate from, the
substantive question of whether the crime took place.
The legal approach to due process is easier to see in an appealing case, such as that of a first
time teenage shoplifter tortured into a confession, as opposed to the unappealing case of a
vicious criminal who is caught dead to rights but is able to escape punishment because a police
officer made a harmless mistake. But even the latter case might have a rationale: to deter future
police mistakes and ensure greater police care in dealing with suspects. Such deterrence could
be more valuable to society than even the conviction of a vicious criminal. However, even if the
deterrence is not greater in value than the conviction of the criminal, the fidelity to the rule that
results in the release of the criminalthe maintenance of the rule of law itselfmay be more
valuable than the conviction.
Back to my earlier example, if you did steal that merchandise, what can your lawyer do? She will
certainly examine whether she can challenge the prosecutions depiction of the facts that are
the basis for a finding that your actions satisfied the components of the crime of theft. But she
will also examine other possible defenses, including those that relate to procedural issues. Does
the court hearing the case have jurisdiction to do so? What precisely is the matter at issue
what factual circumstances are to be examined? What law applies to these facts? Is there
anything that disables the prosecutor from continuing to prosecute the case? Can the
prosecutor bear the burden of proving all of the elements of the crime, including your state of
mind? Is all of the evidence admissible? If you will be convicted, is there a way to limit the
penalties?
Analogous arguments may be made outside the courtroom in everyday life. Children do this all
the time. If they are seeking permission from their parents for an activity, they may select the
parent to ask based on expectations about that parents relative permissiveness compared to
the other. They may even ask the second parent after being turned down by the first parent.
The parent may respond with the procedural rule that Dad is not permitted to contradict Mom,
thus, denying the childs request. Parents also often apply a rule of res judicata, as described in
section 3.14: once a decision is made, it is final.
At a more formal level, lets say that you are a student accused of plagiarism by your teacher.
You might argue that the teacher should not be the one to decide whether you plagiarized or
what penalty to impose, but rather the principal or dean should do so, or a committee should
do so, or an external court should do so. You might argue for a different forum in order to have
a different set of substantive rules applied, or possibly to have a different definition of
plagiarism. Or you might be concerned with procedural rules, such as presumptions, burden of
proof, or remedies. As a teacher, I can attest that your accuser will fear that you may turn the
tables on him by accusing him of dealing with you in an unfair, procedurally defective way.
3.3 Argue That Its None of the Tribunals Business: There Is No Jurisdiction
Legal argument is fundamentally concerned with jurisdiction: the power and scope of
application of legal rules and legal processes. A lawyer defending a client from charges of crime,
or from claims of tort or breach of contract, might begin by challenging the power of the court,
which is initially selected by the prosecutor or the plaintiff, to hear and decide the case and to
impose legal consequences on the defendant.
Courts are agents of the state, authorized and empowered by the state to decide specified cases
and to mete out punishment or remedies as appropriate. All courts are limited in their
jurisdictionin their power to hear and decide cases. This limitation may depend upon the kind
of person being sued, or the kind of person suing, or upon the type of case involved.
Why is the defendants lawyer interested in challenging the jurisdiction of the court? First, if the
case can be thrown out of one court, it increases the litigation expenses to the plaintiff
significantlythe plaintiff might simply give up. Second, the alternative court might apply a
different and more favorable set of legal rules, and a skilled lawyer representing the defendant
will ensure that this is so before seeking dismissal in the first court.
Any time a matter is brought by your opponent before a court or another authoritative
decision-maker, it is worth asking whether or not there is any question regarding the authority
of that court or decision-maker to decide the case. For example, lets say that you run a
Japanese manufacturing company that makes valves for motorcycle tires. You sell some valves
to a Taiwanese tire manufacturer, which inserts the valves in its tires and sells the tires around
the world, including in California. A valve fails on a tire sold to a California consumer, and in the
ensuing crash, his wife dies and he is severely injured. He then sues everyone. The Japanese
company hasnt done any business in California. The Taiwanese company did. Assume further
that California law imposes much greater responsibilities on valve manufacturers than does
either Japanese or Taiwanese law.
Under U.S. constitutional due process law (the Fifth Amendment), it is not enough that the
Japanese valve manufacturers valves merely found their way to the U.S. Rather, there must be
some sufficient relationship between the defendant and the state in which the court sits.
Sufficiency is judged, in part, in terms of fundamental fairness: Is it fair to expect this foreign
person to defend himself in U.S. courts when he has not availed himself of the benefits of doing
business in the state where the court sits? Note, though, that what is really at stake is whether
California law, with its higher standards of responsibility, will be applied.
Thus, interestingly, the power of a court is dependent on the relationship between the
individual defendant and the state in which the court sits. The relationship must be sufficient to
justify the application of authority by that court. We might ask a similar question about whether
a Buddhist can be brought before an Islamic Sharia court, or whether a university tribunal can
determine whether a student can be expelled for plagiarism.
The world has many different kinds of courts and tribunals, and they often have overlapping
mandates and overlapping jurisdiction over persons. So, even if there is jurisdiction over the
defendant, there is also the question of whether the court that the plaintiff has selected is the
best court, or is an appropriate court, to hear the case. In the 1985 Bhopal disaster, in which an
Indian chemical plant owned by a subsidiary of the U.S. company Union Carbide exploded,
killing and injuring many people, there was a significant question whether the case should be
heard by U.S. courts or by Indian courts.
At one point in the Bhopal litigation, we had the counterintuitive phenomenon of the Indian
government arguing that U.S. courts should hear the case. A government was arguing that
another governments courts should settle the dispute about something that occurred within its
territory. Can you imagine why?
There were several reasons, but the largest was that recoveries for personal injury or death are
far greater in the U.S. tort system than in the Indian tort system: Indian plaintiffs would be
better off if their claims were brought in the U.S. Other reasons included the greater ability to
obtain evidence prior to trial in the U.S., the greater ease of establishing a class action among
similarly affected plaintiffs, and the availability of contingency fees that allow plaintiffs to
compensate lawyers from a share of the recovery rather than paying regardless of success.
In the Bhopal case, Union Carbide, as defendant, argued that U.S. courts were not the right
place for the plaintiffs lawsuits. It argued that the plaintiffs and most of the evidence were
located in India, and so this case should be heard in India. In the end, the case was pursued in
India.
A similar type of case arose a few years later in which Ecuadorian plaintiffs from the Lago Agrio
region argued that Texaco (later acquired by Chevron, so from now on I will refer to Chevron)
had so polluted their land in its oil production operations that it caused billions of dollars worth
of damage. That case was filed in a New York court in 1993, and Chevron, like Union Carbide in
Bhopal, argued that the U.S. courts were the wrong place for the lawsuit. In 2001, the New York
court agreed and granted Chevrons request to dismiss the U.S. lawsuit based on Chevrons
promise that it would submit to the jurisdiction of Ecuadorian courts and (subject to certain U.S.
law defenses) would pay any judgment.
In 2011 (yes, it took that long), the Ecuadorian court awarded the Ecuadorian plaintiffs a
judgment for $18 billion. So, Chevrons argument that the New York court was the wrong forum
did not work out as well as planned. Chevron responded with an argument that the Ecuadorian
courts judgment was so defective that it should not be enforced anywhere Chevron had assets.
In a contractual setting, before there is a problem, it is possible to agree on where any disputes
will be heard and on what law will be applied. These contractual forum selection clauses and
choice of law clauses are enforceable in most industrialized countries. In a non-contractual
setting, parties ordinarily do not have an opportunity to select a forum and an applicable law in
advance. Similarly, outside the legal system, it is possible to agree with others in advance what
kind of tribunal will decide any dispute, and what rules they will apply. You might also anticipate
that when a dispute does arise, your opponent will examine that agreement, determine
whether complying with it is in its best interests, and, if it is not, seek to avoid the agreed means
of dispute settlement.
For a non-legal example, consider a purely intra-corporate dispute about whether to raise
prices. Say that the companys finance department, led by the chief financial officer (CFO),
deems it appropriate to raise prices, while the sales department objects because the sales team
believes that raised prices will make it tougher to meet sales goals. Lets say that the vicepresident
in charge of sales refers the matter to the senior vice president (SVP) in charge of
sales and marketing, who occupies a place in the corporate hierarchy above the CFO. The CFO
might object, saying this is not appropriate to be decided by the SVP for sales and marketing,
but should be decided by the corporate chief executive officer. If there existed rules or practices
that laid out the scope of authoritythe jurisdictionof the SVP for sales and marketing, the
argument might turn to an interpretation of those rules or practices.
Tribunals and other decision-makers have limited jurisdiction. It may be possible to challenge
whether they can decide a case, denying your opponent an opportunity to attack you.
In addition, outside the legal system, it is possible to have disputes about whether a particular
method of resolving disputes was truly agreed upon, was agreed upon for this type of dispute,
or can address the rights and duties of a particular person. Where a party would expect to lose
on the substance, it is advantageous for that party to seek to avoid the decision-making
mechanism that would declare or confirm that loss.
Point: This tribunal will decide whether you have done something
wrong.Counterpoint: I deny the authority of this tribunal to make a determination
about whether I have done something wrong.
Courts are limited not only in the persons over whom they may exercise authority but also in
the types of matters over which they may do so. In Israel, for example, Jewish, Druze, Moslem,
and Christian religious courts have exclusive jurisdiction over specified matters, such as
marriage and divorce, within their religious communities.
U.S. federal courts have limited jurisdiction and can only hear cases that relate to issues of
federal law or that involve citizens of different states. In addition, U.S. specialized bankruptcy
courts have exclusive jurisdiction over bankruptcy cases. As you can imagine, there might be
cases in which a variety of legal issues arise, each requiring a different court, that challenge
these systems of exclusive and limited jurisdiction. Depending on how the plaintiff or
prosecutor structures his claims, a different court, and a different body of law, may be required.
Point: This tribunal will decide whether you have done something
wrong.Counterpoint: This tribunal has power over me, but is not the appropriate
tribunal to decide this case.
For example, the iconic U.S. constitutional case of Marbury v. Madison (1803), while
establishing the important principle of judicial review of legislative acts to determine
compliance with the U.S. Constitution, was principally concerned with the scope of the U.S.
Supreme Courts authority under the Constitution. It was concerned with the question of what
cases the Supreme Court has the power to hear. In Marbury v. Madison, the question was
whether the Supreme Court had the jurisdiction to order an executive branch official to take a
particular action (through a writ of mandamus).
The Judiciary Act of 1789 had granted the Supreme Court authority to issue writs of mandamus
in the relevant types of cases, but the question was whether this grant was constitutional or
notwhether the legislature had the power to make that legislative grant of jurisdiction to the
Supreme Court. Hence, the first question to be decided was whether the Supreme Court could
engage in judicial review in order to determine whether this part of the Judiciary Act of 1789
was or was not permissible under the Constitution, which constitutes superior law. Here, and
this is what Marbury v. Madison stands for, the answer was yes: the Supreme Court can review
federal statutes to determine whether they are consistent with the Constitution.
Indeed, the Supreme Court determined that this part of the Judiciary Act of 1789, granting a
power to the Supreme Court that was not in the original grant of power contained in the
Constitution, impermissibly exceeded the Constitution: the Supreme Courts jurisdictional
powers remain limited to those granted in the Constitution. Yes, Marbury v. Madison is striking
because the Supreme Court gave up a smaller power in order to establish the much larger
power of judicial review.4
The Court utilized the interpretive principle of expressio unius (discussed in more detail in
Chapter 4) to reach its conclusion about what it could do under the Constitution. Under
expressio unius, a law or contract that provides a list of things is presumed to mean that list to
be exclusive, excluding other similar things. Thus, the grants of jurisdiction to the Supreme
Court enumerated in the Constitution are considered under expressio unius to be exclusive,
even though their exclusivity is not stated explicitly. Therefore, because the original Constitution
provided no power to issue writs of mandamus, the Supreme Court had none.
3.4 Argue That There Is Something Wrong with This Tribunal: Bias, Conflict of
Interest, Recusal, and Voir Dire
It is much easier to justify a decisionto show its legitimacyif the decision-maker is unbiased.
We say that a decision-maker has a conflict of interest where the decision may affect the
decision-maker in a personal way. Legal systems generally reject decisions that are made by
decision-makers who were biased or corrupt. This impulse is so strong that in some systems,
such as the U.S., even the appearance of bias is sufficient to result in a requirement that a judge
recuse himselfwithdrawfrom hearing the case.
An argument of bias can be made in advance of a decision: the respondent can argue that the
decision-maker selected by the complainant is biased against him, and so should not be allowed
to proceed. The individual decision-maker may be required, or may find it advisable, to recuse
himself.
An argument of bias can also be made after a decision, although the argument seems a bit
more cynical after going through the entire process, unless the evidence of bias or corruption
was not available earlier. In fact, the losing party might be either formally or implicitly
estopped (legally blocked) from claiming bias or corruption, if they go through the process
knowing of the issue without raising it. On arguments of estoppel, see the discussion in
Chapter 6.
Lets continue with the saga of Chevron in Ecuador. As I mentioned above, Chevron began in the
1990s by arguing that the U.S. courts were the wrong place to hear this case about
environmental harms in Lago Agrio, Ecuador. Chevrons motive was to avoid according the
plaintiffs certain of the benefits of being in U.S. courts: liberal rules for gathering evidence
against the defendant, contingency fees so that poor plaintiffs can afford to engage lawyers,
class actions so that many plaintiffs can band together, and, most importantly, large judgments.
But despite the disadvantages of litigating in Ecuador, the plaintiffs prevailed and won an $18
billion judgment. Then, Chevron in effect reversed course, arguing that Ecuador was, as it
turned out, a terrible place to litigate, with corrupt and biased judges. You might say that
Chevron should have been estopped from complaining about Ecuadorian justice, having argued
that the U.S. case should be dismissed in favor of an Ecuadorian proceeding. Chevron might
respond by saying that it could not have anticipated the corruption and bias that it now alleges.
Lawyers have a refined sense of conflict of interest, both for lawyers and for judges. Lawyers are
restricted by their rules of ethics in their ability to work for different clients with adverse
interests. If you find that your opponents lawyer has a conflict of interest of this sort, you can
pressure the lawyer to withdraw, hampering your opponents case. If you feel that the judge
who is about to preside over your case has a conflict of interest in this formal sense (even if
there is no necessary bias), you can pressure that judge to recuse himself. Similar arguments
can be made with non-judge decision-makers.
Experienced lawyers often know some of the proclivities, or ways of thinking, of particular
judges and will seek to avoid judges who they think will be less sympathetic to their arguments.
Often, there is little room for lawyers to affect the choice of judge. But in jury trials, lawyers
have an opportunity to try to identify the proclivities or bias of prospective jurors through a
process known as voir dire. Lawyers will be allotted a certain number of challenges for no
stated reason and may have additional challenges that they can use if there is evidence of
possible bias.
Point: This tribunal will decide whether you have done something
wrong.Counterpoint: This tribunal is biased against me, and therefore cannot
properly decide whether I have done something wrong.Counter-counterpoint: There
may be circumstances that could be understood as a conflict of interest in the
abstract, but it is insulting to the tribunal to accuse it of bias, and there is no
evidence of actual bias.
3.5 Argue for a Characterization of the Case That Makes Your Side More Appealing
The power to frame the question is the power to decide the case. You might worry, Doesnt
this principle give undue power to the plaintiff? The first answer to this worry is yes, but that is
the nature of complaints: the person who makes the complaint has an opportunity to frame it in
the light most favorable to him. While this does give a great deal of power to the plaintiff, it is
available to the defendant to reframe the case, adding other issues to consider, and claim that
they constitute exceptions to the rule or defenses to claims of violation of the rule. Or, the
defendant might argue that the case is not the type of case that the plaintiff framed at all but a
different kind of case.
Recall that we said in Chapter 1 that all contracts and all statutes are necessarily incomplete
we cant anticipate everything. Sometimes the job of completing the contract or legislation is
made especially difficult by the fact that other considerationsother contractual or social
valuesmay conflict with the central rule, raising uncertainty as to how to resolve a particular
case.
For example, take a society in which abortion is thought to be legal. If opponents can seek to
redefineor to definea fetus as a person protected by the rule against murder, the result is
that abortion is illegal. Note the attempt to expand the scope of the rule against murder,
reducing the scope of the permissive rule allowing abortion. This type of potential challenge to
a settled central rule by proposing the application of other rules, or by challenging the
scope of the central rule, is easier and more available than might commonly be thought.
This type of challengelets call it an unanticipated other rule challenge (if it were anticipated
by the legislator of the central rule, that legislator might have specified the resolution of the
conflict)can be applied to arrangements or practices in everyday life.
Lets say that my wife and I have an agreed division of labor whereby she handles all of the
household bills, and I handle all of the childrens educational and extracurricular arrangements,
such as piano lessons. Of course, even I know that Id get into trouble if I tried to put this
arrangement in writing, but it is a verbal agreement in the sense that we used words, which
hopefully we remember, to express our agreement.
The piano teacher expects a check on the date of the first lesson of each month. I assume my
wife will write it under the she takes care of household bills rule. She counters that this does
not fall under that rule, or that it also falls under the educational arrangements rule, and
therefore is my responsibility. I might initially feel blindsided and feel I am being asked to do too
much. But it is easy to see that there is no natural or clear solution to this problem. It is arguably
both, and the outcome will depend on who controls the definition of the respective categories.
Much of legal argumentation has this dynamic. Of course, in many cases, we live with
uncertainty, and we leave it to negotiation later to determine how to handle a particular case.
Indeterminacy is part of social life and can never be eliminated. We might address
indeterminacy, but not eliminate it, by assigning the decision to a third party, such as a court.
In fact, the framing and reframing of a dispute is an arena in which legal creativity can be most
effective and most valuable. A reframing of the dispute is, quite literally, a game-changer.
Therefore, at the moment of definition of the matter in dispute, it is important to think carefully
about all of the alternative ways in which a dispute might be framed. Is it a question of property
rights or a question of environmental protection? Is it a question of murder or of self-defense?
Is it a question of enforcement of contract or one of liability for civil wrongs?
Recall our discussion of differential diagnosis. Take all of the available facts and see with what
diseases they are consistent. In the modern legal system, plaintiffs are often not required to
choose only the right one. They may bring whatever case they want, and sometimes they may
proceed on multiple theories of the case.
When people call a lawyer creative, it is often because the lawyer has found a way to place a
set of facts in a novel legal frame. These lawyers identify, or invent, a source of leveragea
claim of legal rightthat others had not seen.
A dispute about flame-resistance standards for furniture illustrates my point. In 1975, California
enacted a standard that requires furniture to be sufficiently flame-resistant to avoid ignition
from a flame of a specified size. In order to meet this standard, each piece of furniture sold in
California is treated with a substantial amount of chemical flame-retardants. Because of
Californias size and importance in the North American market, most furniture sold in the U.S.
and Canada conforms to Californias standards: most furniture manufacturers sell a uniform
product throughout this territory. While the flame resistance wont prevent the furniture from
burning in a fire, it will limit the ability of the furniture to initially catch fire. The fire-prevention
benefits are thought to be modest. But it would be difficult to criticize framing this as a fireprevention
measure without engaging in complicated cost-benefit analysis.
In more recent years, however, it has been learned that some of the chemicals used to give the
furniture its fire-resistant characteristics may cause cancer or impair brain development.
Therefore, it would no longer be sensible to understand the California standard simply in terms
of its fire-prevention role. We must also understand the California standard in terms of health
and environmental concerns. Once these concerns were discovered, it was appropriate to reframe
the decision whether to continue to apply Californias standardbroadening the
considerations.
The chemical companies that supply the fire-retardant chemicals saw the possible end of a
profitable business. They engaged in some creative lawyering, reframing this as a civil rights
issue. How? They suggested that those at risk for fires are the poorest, and are ethnic
minorities, and that a move away from fire retardants would disproportionately harm these
people. Of course, an easy response is that the health effects of these chemicals also harm
these people, but the health advocates would have to show that the health effects are worse
than the fire effects. So, by reframing the fire-retardant chemical debate as a debate about
disproportionate adverse effects on minorities, the chemical companies are able to add some
strength to their side of the argument.
Point: Fire retardants are needed to prevent fires.Counterpoint: Fire retardants
cause cancer and brain damage.Counter-counterpoint: Restrictions on the use of fire
retardants will disproportionately harm minorities.
One of the most creative and valuable things a lawyer can do is to reframe the issuesto
characterize a dispute as a different type of case than what was originally understood. This
technique is also remarkably effective in non-legal discourse.
3.6 Argue for Application of the Rules That Will Result in Your Victory
A related question to that of the framing of a dispute is the question of the appropriate rules to
apply to the dispute. The modern world is filled with rules: different rules intended to effect
different kinds of policies, rules of local governments, rules of central governments, and rules of
different governments, such as Massachusetts and California or Madagascar and Chile. If one
set of rules does not seem to work for you, perhaps there is another set of rules that might
apply and countermand the first set. Again, this is an area for creative lawyering.
We live in a kaleidoscope society with many overlapping parts and many overlapping rules.
These rules may contradict one another, or one rule may simply encourage what another
prohibits. These different rules may also come from different policy spheres. As a result, it is
possible that a rule providing for environmental protection or remediation is inconsistent with a
local property ordinance, or that a tax law providing a deduction for moneys paid in bribery
encourages bribery at the same time that other laws prohibit bribery.
Point: You have violated the rules.Counterpoint: I may have violated that set of rules,
considered alone, but when you consider another applicable set of rules, my action
was permitted, or even required.
It turns out that we as individuals and we as societies have many values, and there are often
areas in which our values are inconsistent with one another. This is why the framing strategy
discussed in the prior section is always available. Moreover, when we make rules, we often fail
to anticipate all the ways in which the values we seek to implement could conflict with other
values and all the ways in which the rules made now could conflict with other rules made
earlier or later.
In addition, we live in a complex world of overlapping governments and other rule-makers. In a
federal society, such as the U.S., there are 50 states, the federal government, countless
municipalities, companies, religions, universities, clubs, and other organizations that make rules.
Which rules apply? Which ones take precedence in the event of conflict?
Furthermore, in addition to different sources of rules due to the existence of different rulemakers,
there are also different functional rules. So, it may be that a particular religious rule is
inconsistent with a constitutional guarantee of civil rights or with an international law guarantee
of human rights. Or it may be that a rule of freedom of commerce is inconsistent with a rule
restricting movement of environmentally hazardous substances. Should religious law or civil
(governmental) law govern the rights of parents to have their male or female children
circumcised?
Once a particular forum has been definitively selected to decide the case, the next question is,
What rules will that forum apply? Lawyers refer to this in the context of private law, including
contracts, torts, and marriage, as the question of choice of law. In connection with areas of
public law, such as antitrust, taxation, environmental protection, securities regulation, or
export controls, similar questions are referred to as questions of prescriptive jurisdiction. The
essential question is the same: which rules apply to particular persons or behavior? Sometimes
the choice of the court and of the law are firmly intertwined. Thus, if a Sharia court is hearing a
marriage case between two Moslems, then it will apply Sharia law. Sometimes the choice of
court and of the law may be separated, as in a case in which a Kansas court has jurisdiction to
hear the case, but determines to apply foreign law to the dispute because the dispute is most
closely connected to a foreign jurisdiction.
How can, or should, a particular decision-maker, presented with a case, determine what rules to
apply? How can we predict what rules will be applied? There are a number of different
approaches used in different legal contexts. One, which I discuss in Chapter 4 in the context of
interpretation, is the lex specialis principle, which holds that in the event of conflict between
two rules, the more specific rule should be applied. Another common choice of law principle is
to apply the law of the place that has the most significant connection with the events at issue. A
third common approach is to apply the law of the place where the legal obligation arose. In law,
as in life, there is often room for discretion on the part of the decision-maker, and for argument
by the parties involved, as to which rules to apply.
3.7 Argue That Your Opponent Is Wrong, Too: Counterclaims
Sometimes the best defense is to go on the offensive. Its an unattractive human impulse: when
someone criticizes us, we criticize him or her right back. You can imagine the family dinner:
Johnny: Mom, Bobby dropped my cell phone and broke the screen.Bobby: He borrowed my
basketball without asking.
Here, Mom is the tribunal, and she must decide whether to adjudicate these claims separately
or to combine them. Indeed, Bobby might not have raised the basketball issue if Johnny had not
complained about the cell phone. These claims seem best treated separately because they are
apparently unrelated matters, but sometimes the claim and the counterclaim are related.
For example, in business, where a firm claims that another firm has engaged in patent
infringement, the alleged infringer will often bring a counterclaim for antitrust violationsfor
monopolization or other restraint of trade through the patent. Or, where a business sues a
consumer for payment on a loan relating to a purchase, the consumer might counterclaim for
fraud or for some defect in the purchased good.
In the epic dispute between Apple and Samsung over smart phone and tablet technologies,
Apple brought a claim for patent infringement, but then Samsung counterclaimed that Apple
had tried to use its technologies to monopolize the market and had infringed Samsungs
patents.
While it is definitely true that two wrongs do not make a right, it is possible that my obligation
to compensate you for the wrong that I did you can be counterbalanced, and reduced, by your
obligation to compensate me for the wrong you did me.
Point: Youve wrongfully harmed me, and the damages are $100.Counterpoint: That
may be so, but youve harmed me too, and the damages are $150, so you owe me
$50.Counter-counterpoint: Lets deal with the issue Ive raised first, and then you can
make your claim.
3.8 Argue That Its None of the Complainants Business: Standing
If a tree falls in the forest, and no one is around to hear, has it really fallen? Most of us would
say that the event occurs independent of human observation. However, think about the
possibility that a legal obligation exists, but it cannot be asserted by anyone. This is the question
of standing. If a legal obligation exists but cannot be asserted by anyone, it may not have
practical effect.
Or, it may be that the obligation exists and can be asserted by someone, but the people who
have the right to assert it are not interested in doing so. However, in law, as in life, there are
those who are interested in other peoples business. They may be benevolent helpers or
advocates, assisting a person in realizing his or her appropriate rights. But, they also may be
seeking to assert control over a relationship to which they are not party; they may be officious
intermeddlers.
Legal systems often limit the right to sue to certain people and so declare that these people
have standing. Often, but not always, standing is aligned with the existence of a protectable
legal interest, or the existence of direct injury to the plaintiff. This issue is important in
connection with public interest lawyering. For example, the early U.S. environmental movement
depended on the expansion of standing to allow nongovernmental organizations to sue on
behalf of the public interest in environmental protection.
During the early days of the environmental movement in the U.S., nongovernmental
organizations such as the Sierra Club played a leading role in advocating for environmental
protection. In 1972, the Supreme Court decided an important case regarding whether the Sierra
Club had standing to bring a lawsuit to block the development of a ski area in the Mineral King
Valley in California.
The Mineral King Valley is a beautiful area in the High Sierra within the Sequoia National Forest.
The U.S. Forest Service was seeking to develop a ski area there and had selected the Disney
Company to do so. The Sierra Club, whose members included individuals who used the Mineral
King Valley for recreation, opposed the development. After failing in its attempts to convince
the U.S. Forest Service to hold off on the development, the Sierra Club brought a lawsuit
seeking a declaratory judgment that various aspects of the proposed development contravened
federal laws and regulations governing the preservation of national parks, forests, and game
refuges.
In Sierra Club v. Morton, the U.S. Supreme Court confirmed that under the relevant U.S. statute
a mere interest in a problem, no matter how longstanding the interest and no matter how
qualified the organization is in evaluating the problem, is not sufficient by itself to render the
organization adversely affected or aggrieved within the meaning of the statute. On the other
hand, the Court said that
aesthetic and environmental well-being, like economic well-being, are important ingredients
of the quality of life in our society, and the fact that particular environmental interests are
shared by the many rather than the few does not make them less deserving of legal protection
through the judicial process. But the injury in fact test requires more than an injury to a
cognizable interest. It requires that the party seeking review be himself among the injured.
After the Supreme Courts decision, the Sierra Club took the Courts suggestion to re-file with
plaintiffs who actually used the Mineral King Valleys recreational opportunities, and Disney
finally gave up.
How does the question of standing come up in ordinary life? We all know of circumstances in
which someone complains about something that does not directly affect him. Sometimes these
persons perform a useful function, as when they criticize someone for littering. We may think of
them as policy entrepreneurs or as decentralized agents of enforcement.
At other times, these interlopers can interfere with direct negotiations or relationships between
the person causing the problem and the person experiencing the adverse effects. By eliminating
the officious intermeddler, it is easier to reach satisfactory agreement between the actual
parties in interest. The acceptability of this type of private agreement depends on whether
there are unrepresented interests that are being hurt, such as the interests of the broader
public, or whether there are limitations on the ability of those actually hurt to act. If there are,
the officious intermeddler will perform a useful function. In addition, someone who seems to
have no interest that is recognized by society, and therefore no standing, may have an interest
that should be recognized.
Point: Youve done something wrong.Counterpoint: Who are you to complain? Its
not your concern.Counter-counterpoint: I am trying to represent people who are
injured but are not capable of representing themselves.
3.9 Argue That the Complainant is Tainted: In Pari Delictus, Tu Quoque, Clean
Hands, and Contributory Negligence
These are special types of ad hominem arguments, which I discuss further in Chapter 7: the
criticized person argues that the complainant has taken action, or has a status, that disqualifies
it from bringing the case or reduces the appropriate recovery. Even those who would ordinarily
have standing may be precluded from bringing a lawsuit. This may arise if they played some role
in causing the problem about which they are complaining or if they harmed the defendant in a
similar or relevant way.
This issue comes up often outside the legal system. Who are you to talk? It often happens
that if one person criticizes another, the target will defend by pointing out shortcomings of the
critic.
This rhetorical strategy is known in Latin as tu quoque. Western lawyers are still enamored with
Latin, often when we are expressing something that does not otherwise make sense. After all,
tu quoque can be defeated by the folk wisdom that two wrongs dont make a right. But tu
quoque makes sense in some circumstances. The more relevant the shortcomings of the critic
the more similar the shortcomings of the critics targetthe stronger the counterattack,
especially if the critic himself has played some role in causing the harm about which the critic
has complained.
Lets focus on the in pari delicto principle. The rationale of this principle is to prevent one joint
wrongdoer from suing another for damages that resulted from their shared wrongdoing. The
idea is that courts should not be available to reallocate loss between wrongdoers.
The in pari delicto defense might be used where there are multiple parties involved in a fraud
and one party tries to sue the other for the first partys losses. A classic scenario is where a
publicly-owned corporation commits securities fraud by misstating its financial condition. The
corporations officers participate in the fraud, and the companys auditors go along with it. The
company would like to sue its auditors for their participation in the fraud, but because the
company itself is formally responsible for the fraud, it is in pari delicto with the auditors.
Here is a strange, and seemingly inappropriate, use of the in pari delicto defense. You may recall
that Bernie Madoff, the financier, ran an incredible Ponzi scheme, robbing innocent investors of
billions of dollars. Once the extent of the fraud was revealed, a federal agency charged with
protecting securities investors (the Securities Investor Protection Corporation, or SIPC)
appointed a trustee to liquidate Madoffs firm, with the goal of paying off investors as much as
possible. In pursuit of this goal, one of the things the trustee does is go after other firms or
persons who either intentionally or negligently contributed to the fraud.
Here is where in pari delicto comes in. Since conceptually the trustee stands in the shoes of
Madoffs firm, it might be understood to be in pari delicto with all of these other intentional
and negligent fraudsters. If this were so, these other fraudsters would have a defense against
the trustees claims. This seems like an inappropriate application of the in pari delicto principle.
In a sense, this case presents a conflict between formal application of the law and doing what
makes sense. The problem is that the trustee, standing in the shoes of a firm that committed
fraud, does not really represent the firm itself, but represents the claimants against the firm, so
the principle of in pari delicto is not substantively relevant, even though it may be formally
relevant. I discuss the relationship between form and substance in Chapter 8.
Point: Youve done something wrong.Counterpoint: Who are you to complain
youre just as guilty.
3.10 Argue That Its Too Early: Ripeness and Exhaustion of Lesser Remedies
One way of keeping a complainant from using the forum it would prefer is to argue that the
dispute is not yet ready for that forum. Here there are two lines of argument. The first argues
that the dispute is not yet a real dispute: it is not ripe. Perhaps the complainant has not yet
been harmed. The forum the complainant has chosen is reserved for actual disputes where
harm has been experienced rather than potential disputes. An example is where a potential
defendant has threatened some action that would harm the potential complainant, and the
potential defendant has a legal duty not to cause this harm. If the harm has not yet been
caused, and if there is not an independent prohibition or remedy for incipient harm, we would
say that this dispute is not yet ripe.
In the context of challenges to administrative agency action in the U.S. government, the U.S.
Supreme Court has expressed the rationale for the ripeness doctrine as follows:
Without undertaking to survey the intricacies of the ripeness doctrine it is fair to say that its
basic rationale is to prevent the courts, through avoidance of premature adjudication, from
entangling themselves in abstract disagreements over administrative policies, and also to
protect the agencies from judicial interference until an administrative decision has been
formalized and its effects felt in a concrete way by the challenging parties. The problem is best
seen in a twofold aspect, requiring us to evaluate both the fitness of the issues for judicial
decision and the hardship to the parties of withholding court consideration.5
In dealing with disputes, patience may be a virtue. On the other hand, for a claimant, being
required to wait for a resolution can be frustrating and, at times, unfair. Ripeness doctrine
reflects the zen-like idea that we should not act too early in response to a problem, but instead
allow it to reach a point where intervention is more useful. Its also a practical heuristic that we
should not use more confrontational or drastic methods of dispute settlement when less
intense methods have not yet been tried.
Early intervention has several problems. First, the actual harm may never eventuate, and then
think of all the resources wasted determining responsibility for it. Second, unless we allow it to
unfold, we will not know the details of the problem and how best to address it. Third, if the
dispute settlement system stays out of the fight, the parties may be able to reach a more
nuanced and satisfactory resolution on their own.
Lets say that a nearby electricity generation plant is storing nuclear waste not far from your
home. You might complain that this nuclear waste could escape and harm you, but is this
complaint ripe? It depends on whether there is a legal rule that restricts potentially harmful
situations or whether the only applicable legal rule only addresses actual harm.
In a smaller context, your neighbor might acquire a vicious dog. You might tell your neighbor of
your concerns that his dog will hurt you or your family, but your neighbor might respond by
saying that his dog has not hurt anyone yet. Here, the interesting question is the extent to
which your neighbor has the right to expose you to potential harm. The common law rule, now
modified by statute and case law in many places, was the one-bite rule. No liability would
arise even from injuries, provided that there was no prior evidence that the dog was dangerous.
If the dispute is otherwise ripe, a defendant can also argue that another dispute settlement
mechanism should be used first or that another action should be taken first. This procedurally
required first step may be as simple as a requirement to make a demand on the potential
respondent for compensation. Or it may be a requirement to enter into negotiations in good
faith. Finally, it may be a requirement to use a lower level of dispute settlement before
proceeding to the higher level. Here, the complainant might argue that these actions would be
futile to settle the dispute, but the law around the principle of ripeness might require an
exercise in futility.
This question of the exhaustion of what one might call less escalated means of dispute
settlement often comes up in international law relating to human rights or investment. These
areas of international law often deal with how a person is treated by his or her own government
in connection with human rights or by a foreign host government in connection with
international investment. The exhaustion of less escalated means of dispute settlement, here
called the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies, asks that the human rights claimant or
investor go through the domestic courts first to see if they can get the appropriate treatment,
and only after exhausting that avenue, move to the higher level of international dispute
settlement.
In international investment law, the traditional remedy for a foreign investor is to seek
diplomatic protection from its home state government. However, diplomatic protection is
generally unavailable until the foreign investor exhausts local remedies. In this case, the home
country may not wish to intervene, and the host country surely does not wish the home country
to intervene until the process within the host country plays itself out fully. In recent years,
however, bilateral investment treaties and other international investment agreements have
often provided that the foreign investor will not be required to exhaust local remedies before
bringing an international law claim. These changes seem to reflect a concern that the
requirement to exhaust local remedies may be an unnecessary impediment to a claim.
You can readily see how the exhaustion of less escalated remedies argument might be useful in
non-legal discourse. When your co-worker complains to your manager regarding something you
have done, your first response might be why didnt he come to me first to discuss his
concerns? Your manager might agree that your co-worker has shown a lack of collegiality and
has wasted the managers time.
Point: Youve done something that can harm me in the future.Counterpoint: Lets
examine this if and when you are harmed.Counterpoint 2: Lets discuss this or use a
less formal means of dispute settlement before we escalate it.Counter-counterpoint:
Once I am harmed, it will be too late. Compensation wont replace what I will lose,
and I am not sure you will have the wherewithal to compensate me.Countercounterpoint
2: Less formal means will be futile, and will simply operate to make my
remedy more costly, and less prompt.
3.11 Argue That Its Too Late: Statutes of Limitations, Prescription, and Repose
Somewhere between lack of ripeness and expiration of the statute of limitations, the
complainant has a chance to make a claim or complaint. Statutes of limitations, and their
continental European civil law analog, the doctrine of prescription, are designed to let bygones
be bygones. This is the legal concept of reposethat after a substantial enough period of time,
expectations are settled and it would be too much of a disturbance to revisit old issues. In
addition, memories and evidence fade away, making it harder to bring and to defend a case.
Now, you may be thinking, there is a counter to this: some wrongs just should never be
forgotten or forgiven. For example, in the U.S., murder is often excluded from the operation of a
statute of limitations. But society seems to allow some things to be forgotten, if not forgiven.
One question about the operation of a statute of limitations is when does it begin to run?
Generally speaking, a statute of limitations begins to run when a cause of action arises, meaning
all of the elements of that cause of action exist. In cases of tort, for example, the statute of
limitations begins to run at the time of harm. However, if the harm is not apparent, the statute
of limitations may begin to run only when the complainant obtains reason to know of the harm.
For example, a doctor might prescribe an incorrect medicine that causes harm, but the harm
might not be detected until later. The statute of limitations period would not begin to run until
the harm is detected.
In 2012, a U.S. appeals court determined that a statute of limitations prevented the
continuation of a lawsuit about the authenticity of a bottle of wine. William I. Koch, one of
three billionaire brothers, brought the lawsuit against Christies, the auction house. He bought a
bottle of wine marked 1787 Branne-Mouton Th.J. for $100,000, in 1988. Koch alleged that he
purchased the wine based on glowing endorsements by Christies. He began to investigate the
wines authenticity in 1993 and received a carbon dating report in 2000 from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution to the effect that there was only a 4.6% probability that the wine
was from the period between 1740 and 1800. The court found that the two-year statute of
limitations began to run once Koch received the report in 2000, and that the lawsuit was barred
by 2005, when Koch filed.
The concept of statute of limitations or repose is readily applied to interpersonal relations. If
you harbor a grudge about something that occurred long ago and then bring it up, the target
may rightfully object that it is too late to deal with something that occurred so far in the past.
The target may even criticize you for failing to bring it up earlier and for bringing it up now.
Point: Five years ago, you did something that harmed me.Counterpoint: Wow, you
should have said something then. In any event, its too late nowI dont even
remember that.Counter-counterpoint: I only was injured by your act recently, and
only learned about your harmful act after the injury. Before I knew of the problem, I
could not be expected to complain, and I should not be denied recourse now.
3.12 Argue That Your Opponent Must Prove His Case Before You Must Prove Yours:
Burdens of Proof
In any argument, who will win may depend on who has the burden of bringing forth evidence of
his position (burden of production), and who has the burden of persuading the decision-maker
of the correctness of his position (burden of proof). This is extremely important in many public
policy and personal decision-making contexts. The burden of proof is a heuristic that says we
will leave things as they are unless the person to whom the burden is allocated is able to prove
that he has a right to a different determination. The standard of proof, on the other hand,
determines how good a case the person who bears the burden of proof must make. You might
say that the burden of proof is like a presumption: we presume that things are best left as they
are unless the person assigned the burden shows us differently. Presumptions are discussed in
Chapter 6. Presumptions are a special type of allocation of the burden of proof; the proponent
of the presumed fact need present no evidence, and the opponent of the presumption must
provide evidence that it is not true.
You may already be familiar with the U.S. burden and standard of proof in criminal cases. The
burden is generally on the prosecutor to prove guilt and the standard is beyond a reasonable
doubt. This burden of proof is consistent with an assumption that the accused is innocent
until proven guilty. The criminal standard of proof is set at a relatively high level. In U.S. civil
cases, the burden is generally on the plaintiff to prove his case by a preponderance of the
evidence.
Burdens of proof can become dramatic in health, safety, and environmental contexts. For
example, gas-drilling companies might be asked to prove that fracking is safe before doing it.
They might respond to their opponents that the opponents should prove it is unsafe before
stopping them. In other contexts, we might ask whether the burden of proof as to safety and
effectiveness of a new medicine is on the pharmaceutical company, or instead is assigned to the
pharmaceutical regulator. Are new cattle feeds to be used until it is proven that they may cause
harm to those who eat the meat from the cattle, or are they to be prohibited until their
harmlessness is shown? (You can readily see the relationship to the question of ripeness.)
Often, the burden of proof in formal legal proceedings is determined by whether the matter at
issue is part of an affirmative case brought by a plaintiff or prosecutor. If so, the burden would
be on the plaintiff or prosecutor respectively. However, if the matter at issue is an element of a
defense that may be brought by a defendant, the burden is on the defendant.
For example, if you want to claim that the high-priced restaurant you dined at last night gave
you food poisoning, you will have to prove that they served you tainted food, and that the
tainted food caused you to be sick. Until you do so, they have no obligation to prove that their
food was not tainted. As we say in the criminal area, a defendant is innocent until proven guilty:
the burden of proof to make the case is on the prosecutor.
Wherever possible, it will be advantageous to argue that your opponent must bear the burden
of proof. Where there is no prior understanding about the allocation of the burden of proof, it is
always helpful to argue for the allocation of the burden to your opponent. You might even begin
an argument by making statements consistent with an assumption that the burden of proof is
on your opponent. In informal discourse, you can shift the burden of proof with a simple how
do you know in response to your opponents assertion. A savvy opponent might respond that
it is not his job to sustain a burden of proof, but yours. He can do so simply by saying, How do
you know Im wrong?
Burdens of proof are sometimes allocated in accordance with some sense of rightfulness. It
does not seem right to ask people to be able to prove their innocence on demand. This seems
to explain why in criminal law in the U.S. it is for the prosecutor to prove guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Burdens of proof might alternatively be allocated to the person with the
easiest access to the evidence. If the question relates to your own skills or characteristics, you
should bear the burden of proof.
There is no natural or obvious way of allocating the burden of proof when debating whether a
particular action should be taken. Those with a free market bent might tend toward putting the
burden of proof on the opponents of an action, and those who are more risk averse might tend
toward putting the burden on the person seeking to take potentially risky action. As you might
imagine, the best allocation of the burden of proof will depend on the magnitude of the
potential harms, the costs of finding out about the harms, and the magnitude of the benefits.
Most of us would say that where the potential dangers of action are great, where the costs of
finding out are relatively small, and the magnitude of the benefits of action are relatively small,
we would put the burden of proof on the proponent of action and vice versa.
Point: I do not think you can prove that you are right.Counterpoint: But I do not think
you can prove that I am wrong. Unless you can, I can go ahead and keep doing what I
am doing, because there is no prohibition of activity that is not proven wrong.
Allocation of the burden of proof may have clear substantive effects, favoring the position of
one side or the other. For example, imagine yourself the parent of a child with learning
disabilities. Under the U.S. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, a child is entitled to
appropriate education, spelled out in a special education plan prepared by the local public
school district. Assume that your local school district has provided a special education plan that
mainstreams your child in large classes, with what you regard as insufficient special attention.
You reject that plan and place your child in a private school that you believe provides
appropriate education. You send the school district the tuition bill, and it refuses to pay, saying
that its plan was indeed appropriate, and that you are required to accept its plan. You believe
that the school districts special education plan does not meet the standard of appropriate
under the law.
Who decides what is appropriate? In the case I am referring to, the school district argued that it
initially is responsible for deciding, and the burden of proof is on the parents to show that the
special education plan is inappropriate. The parents argued that the burden of proof is on the
school district to show that the plan is appropriate. Satisfying either burden of proof is tough,
and substantively, if the burden of proof is on the parents, then the school district has a greater
margin of error. If the burden of proof is on the parents, the school district can get away with a
generally lesser standard of appropriate education. So, a lot can be at stake in the allocation of
the burden of proof, even where no dispute has arisen.
Indeed, imagine a parent, with no particular expertise in education, and perhaps with limited
resources with which to obtain legal representation or to hire consultants, pitted against the
tax-funded resources of a school district. Should not the school district, which has the obligation
to provide an appropriate special education plan, and which has great resources and expertise
in education, have the burden to show that its plan is indeed appropriate? The school district
might respond to the effect that it is charged with the public good and should be assumed to be
acting in accordance with its mandate. It is then for the parents to show that it has somehow
failed. As you can see, both sides of the argument have appealing elements.
As suggested in this example, the standard rule in most types of cases is that the complainant
has the burden of proof to prove the allegations made in his complaint. The complainant must
prove each element of the claim. And in the case at hand, the U.S. Supreme Court applied this
default rule (a rule that applies broadly unless there are special circumstances) to allocate the
burden of proof to the complaining parents. Justice OConnor said that absent some reason to
believe that Congress intended otherwise, the burden of proof should be where it usually
falls, upon the party seeking relief. 6
So, if someone complains about your behavior, you may argue that he has the burden of
proving its danger or inappropriateness. If positions are reversed, and you complain about
someone elses behavior, and he attempts to allocate the burden of proof to you, you may
assert that his special capabilities, other circumstances, or the special risks involved in his
behavior, are reasons to allocate the burden of proof to him.
Point: This looks dangerous; prove that it is safe before we move
forward.Counterpoint: Its not a problem; prove that it is unsafe before we
stop.Counter-counterpoint: Given the overall level of likelihood that this type of
activity may be dangerous, and the magnitude of the harm that would occur if the
danger eventuates, it is appropriate that the person proposing the action bear the
prior burden of proving its safety, rather than to ask those who may be harmed to
prove its danger.
3.13 Argue That Even If the Complainant Wins, He Deserves Nothing: Remedies and
Enforcement
Even if you lose, dont give up. Even if you win, dont let up. There is still the question of what
the complainant gets by way of remedies or enforcement. The law books are replete with
stories of victorious plaintiffs who got very little for their trouble and conversely of losing
defendants who were made to suffer very little by way of consequences of their actions.
There are two main questions here. First, will the tribunal or other decision-maker that you
choose order the remedy that you wish? It may be that the court is not completely comfortable
with the justice of your position but agrees that you should be victorious as a technical matter
of law. It expresses its discomfort by ordering modest remedies. For example, it may value the
level of damages that you have suffered in a way that understates them. Or it may decline to
order your defendant to do what he promised to do.
Second, assuming the court orders the remedy that you wish, there is a question whether the
defendant can be forced to comply. The defendant may have insufficient resources to comply, or
its resources may be immune from the power of the court, perhaps located in a foreign
jurisdiction.
Point: Youve done something wrong, and it has caused me harm.Counterpoint:
i. It has not harmed you.
ii. It has not harmed you nearly as much as you say
iii. Even though it has harmed you, there is nothing that I am required to do to
compensate you.
iv. While I may be required to compensate you, you have no way to force me to do
so.
3.14 Argue That Its Already Been Decided: Res Judicata, Collateral Estoppel,
Repose, and Double Jeopardy
If you dont like the answer you get the first time, one strategic response is to ask the question
again. But this is costly in terms of social decision-making resourcesin the legal system,
judicial resourcesand also in terms of certainty and repose. Repose in this context is the idea
that we are better off if we can rely on decisions that have been made previously without fear
that they will be changed. That is, once a decision is made, it is good for people to be able to
rely on it. Get over it and move on. In addition, we want to protect potential defendants from
vexatious litigation. So, we say that the plaintiff gets only one bite of the apple. I have no idea
why the saying refers to applesperhaps it is inspired by the Adam and Eve story or perhaps by
rules relating to bobbing for apples.
Res judicata means that once a case is finally decided (after appeals are exhausted), it cannot be
heard again. You had your chance and now it is definitively decided. Collateral estoppel means
that if, on the way to a final judgment, there was a sub-issue that was definitively decided, then
that sub-issue cannot be litigated again. There are many questions that must be answered when
applying these doctrines. What is a final decision? Between what parties? On what issues?
Precluding what? These questions represent process values that may trump substantive justice.
Double jeopardy is a criminal law doctrine that prevents a defendant from being tried for the
same crime twice.
Often arguments end this way: we already decided it, dont open it up again. Where this
claim has the power to stick, its force comes from the same kinds of concerns as in the legal
system: avoiding spending excessive time rehashing the arguments and repose. One question
that is important is, what precisely did we decide? In addition, did we have all of the evidence
or arguments before us? Was there some other defect in the process?
From a social or business standpoint, if you got it wrong the first time, you want the chance to
get it right. But you dont want to be constantly re-litigating old arguments.
Point: You already had your chance to make this claim and you lost. Now just drop
it.Counterpoint:
i. This is a formally different claim.
ii. There are new facts.
iii. There is a new way to frame the argument.
3.15 Argue That a Process Was Followed (or Flawed): Process Values Are Real
Values
At the core of the legal profession, and at the core of the distinction between lawyers and
others, is concern for process values. We sometimes refer to these process values as mere
technicalities, or even worse as loopholes, but the legal profession and a rule-of-law-based
society are committed to the principle that process values are real values and should sometimes
overcome substantive values.
It is in this context that I bring up the question, why is it that some of the best lawyers become
leading managers in industry and in government, not to mention law firms? Besides possessing
knowledge of law and being skilled with the methods of analysis and argument discussed in this
book, lawyers bring heightened sensitivity to procedural concerns that others may lack.
So, instead of making a decision straight away, a lawyer might ask, what process should be
followed in order to make a decision; what is due process in this context? What procedure
would legitimate the decision so that it would be respected by those who are affected?
This approach might be cumbersome and unattractive if it slows things down too much or is too
costly. But it can result in better decisions under the right circumstances. The question really is
one of choice. If the lawyer understands that an extensive process might be unnecessarily
cumbersome in particular circumstances and is able to distinguish the circumstances where
more extensive processes are superior, or appropriate, the lawyer will have an advantage over
someone less sensitive to process values. Good process is a central component of good
management and good policy making. Perhaps this is because good process, and the kind of
careful analysis that is a hallmark of legal thought, is a way to question the emotional or
unconsidered impulses that can adversely influence our decision-making.
In addition, sensitivity to process values often brings greater legitimacy or buy-in for
decisions. Constituents are more willing to accept decisions with which they do not agree if they
feel that their views have been heard. Employees tend to be faithful to corporate goals if they
have had a voice and have had a chance to learn the reasons for the decision.
Complainants must be sensitive to process, not only because they may lose on the process even
though they deserve substantively to win, but also because sensitivity to process values brings
greater legitimacy or buy-in, increasing the sympathy of the defendant and others for the
complainants position.
Point: I am dissatisfied with this decision.Counterpoint: I followed a legitimate
process to arrive at this decision and your view was considered.
4
Arguing About the Meaning of
Texts: Interpretation
Word, words, wordslawyers are all about words. For lawyers and non-lawyers alike, words, as
relevant here, are used to communicate commitments now about how we will do things in the
future. Words are used to construct categories of behavior that are prohibited, required, or
permitted. Words are the building blocks used to craft the if-then statements that are at the
core of commitments in contracts and laws. These commitments are at the core of civilization
and of complex production and commerce. Unfortunately, our words are inherently subject to
ambiguity and dispute, and these categories and commitments are characterized by a basic
fluidity.
Why are words important to lawyers? Remember the Godfather and the idea that those words,
contained in the texts carried in a lawyers briefcase, have greater power than a gang of armed
hoods. This is because these are not ordinary words; they carry the force of the state.
The ability to direct the force of the state is a great power indeed. This power must be
controlled and applied in an orderly and legitimate way. Recall the liberal and anti-monarchist
ambition stated by the early U.S. statesman John Adams in 1774, when he sought to establish:
a government of laws, and not of men. If men control the meaning of laws, however, is it not a
government of men? The best response is that there is a core of meaning that men cannot
change, once a commitment is made. However, there is often plenty of room for argument.
If we respect the principle of a government of laws, we must also recognize that the power to
interpret is the power to ruleto apply the force of the state. Recall Alices conversation with
Humpty Dumpty.
When I use a word, Humpty Dumpty said in a rather scornful tone, it means just what I
choose it to meanneither more nor less.The question is, said Alice, whether you can make
words mean so many things.The question is, said Humpty Dumpty, which is to be master
thats all. 7
To support a government of laws, the words of laws must have an appropriately stable meaning
with a reliable and transparent means of identifying the meaning. This is important after
legislation is made so that it is a government of laws and not of men, but it is also important
when laws and contracts are written. It is useful to have clear rules about how our laws and
contracts will be interpreted so that skilled draftsmen can express commitments clearly,
precisely, and predictably.
Legal draftsmen, and anyone who writes or works with contracts, must be knowledgeable about
the applicable rules of interpretation, so that they may anticipate how their words will be
understood. For example, the interpretive rule of effet utile assumes that utilization of different
words is intended to convey different meaningsthat use of different words is not just for
stylistic reasons or due to random unintentional usage variations. A draftsman aware of the
effet utile rule would never use different words for the same thing just for stylistic variation or
out of inattention.
What is of paramount importance is that Congress be able to legislate against a background of clear interpretative
rules, so that it may know the effect of the language it adopts.
Justice Antonin Scalia, in Finley v.
United States (1989)
If it is to be a government of laws, and if laws are composed of words, then people dealing with
government, including but not limited to lawyers, must be expert at dealing with words. As
stated in the introduction, all verbal expression intended to govern future events is, by its
nature, incomplete. It is incompletely specific because it fails to describe every future
circumstance. It fails to describe every future circumstance because the possible set of future
circumstances is infinite. This incompleteness is endemic to all verbal expression in law,
including contracts and statutes. To the ordinary person, this is a problem; to the lawyer, it is an
opportunity for advantage.
Imagine a machine into which you could place (a) a factual description of a new circumstance
that has arisen, (b) a necessarily incomplete law or contract. Imagine that this machine could
tell you whether or not, and how, the incomplete law or contract applies to the new
circumstance. This machine is necessary in order to ensure that when a dispute arises over the
applicability of a law or contract to a new circumstance, it can be resolved. Lawyers preside over
this machine. We call this machine the legal system and one major component of its activity
interpretation. The legal system is a machine to complete contracts, statutes, and other laws,
and to apply them to facts as they arise.
In this chapter, I will present an array of interpretive techniques. You may well ask how we
should select among themwhich are relevant to which interpretive situations? Even more
importantly, which techniques dominate which other techniquesis there a hierarchy of
interpretive techniques established in order to avoid conflicting outcomes based on different
techniques? I am sorry to report that this is often the realm of sophistry. Lawyers deploy these
interpretive techniques in an effort to win the argument; there are no fixed rules about which
apply when, and so they all are available to any situation. Nor is there generally any formal
hierarchy, 8 but where a rule of interpretation fits a particular interpretive context well, it
generally will dominate.
As an advocate, the lawyers job is to use, and argue the relevance of, the interpretive
techniques that result in victory. So, skilled lawyers will act as though the interpretive technique
that results in their victory is the obviously applicable one, while opposing lawyers will be able
to show alternative, and seemingly equally obvious, interpretive techniques that result in their
victory. A layperson can do the same.
There are two opposing canons [of interpretation] on almost every point.Karl Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory
of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes are to be Construed, 3 Vanderbilt Law Review
395, 401 (1950)
Interpretive techniques are arguments about the way that rules, whether they appear in
constitutions, treaties, statutes, contracts, regulations, or judicial decisions, should be
understood, and they are used strategically. For each interpretive technique, there is a
response, and there is also the possibility of application of alternative interpretive techniques,
all with the implication of a possible alternative substantive outcome. Furthermore, there is no
reason not to deploy these interpretive techniques in non-legal circumstances where you are
arguing about the meaning of a verbal commitment, whether written or oral.
Although there are many techniques available and no fixed hierarchy, take comfort. The choice
is not completely indeterminate and random. The choice of interpretive technique is a method
of argument. Some interpretive techniques will be more plausible than others in that they will
carry with them greater persuasive logicgreater intuitive appealin particular circumstances.
Some that are well known and often used can be presumed to have been taken into account by
the authors of the text being interpreted. I try to present the arguments in their ordinary order
of appeal, but hasten to add that the order presented is impressionistic, and not based on
empirical research.
4.1 Plain Meaning and the Dictionary
Everybody likes plain meaning as an interpretive rule. It seems so simple. We just want to
enforce the law or the contract as it is written. The problem, as I have stated above, is that the
words on the paper are, by necessity, incompletely specific.
This does not mean that the words used are necessarily insufficiently specificit may well be,
and it often is the case, that the reasonable interpreter, applying common knowledge, finds
only a single meaning. Strategic players will often argue about the plain meaning even where
the meaning is sufficiently clear for disinterested persons. This is why the institution of courts
initially aroseto frustrate strategic argument where the parties really did address the matter
with sufficient specificity in advance. Where the words are sufficiently specific to decide the
matter, there is no problem. But what do we do when plain meaning in the sense of common
knowledge is not enough?
One answer is to refer to the dictionary. My main area of expertise is international trade law,
focusing on the law of the World Trade Organization (WTO). When I first understood that WTO
tribunals systematically referred to the compact edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), I
bought myself a copy. If we are to refer to plain meaning, and if plain meaning means dictionary
meaning, and if the dictionary is the OED, then we might say that every contract, regulation,
statute, and treaty incorporates by reference the meanings supplied in the OED. Thus, the OED
controls the meaning of law. This would not necessarily be a bad outcome, but if it were the
outcome, we would have to have a copy of the OED, and refer to it, when we write or read
contracts, regulations, statutes, and treaties. People do not generally do so yet, and they may
have a different meaning in mindthey likely have a different dictionary in mind. However,
those negotiating WTO treaty amendments would be well advised to keep their OED handy.
Plain meaning has other limitations. For one, dictionaries contain alternative meanings.
Beyond that, constitutions, treaties, laws, and contracts are often made in the midst of tough
negotiations and are the result of struggle and compromise. As a result, their words do not
often conform to the highest standards of draftsmanship. Therefore, it may be tough to infer a
coherent plain meaning from the words alone.
Even dictionary meanings do not necessarily indicate or exhaust the meaning of a word in
context. Indeed, the context of the contract or law may suggest a non-dictionary meaning for a
word. So, dictionaries are of only limited use, and plain meaning is not necessarily simple to
determine. What if the legislators or parties to the agreement use words in a special way? What
if a clothing manufacturer and its customer use the word inflammable in their contract
(erroneously) to mean that the clothing cannot burst into flames. What if it is understood that a
ton is a metric ton? Under these circumstances, why should the parties be limited to the plain
meaning, as opposed to the meaning they intended?
There is an answer to that question: we refer to plain meaning because it may be too difficult
and too uncertain to charge the court or other decision-maker with determining what the
parties actually intended. It may be that the plain meaning of the words is the best evidence of
what the parties actually intended, and by referring to the plain meaning, we can foreclose
strategic efforts to demonstrate a different intent later. In the next two sections, I discuss ways
to supplement plain meaning through examination of intent and through examination of
context.
Point: We should interpret this agreement in accordance with the plain meaning of
the words.Counterpoint:
i. The dictionary contains multiple meanings. Therefore, the meaning of these
words is ambiguous.
ii. We should determine the meaning of these words in context.
iii. We should determine the meaning of these words in accordance with the
purpose of the text.
iv. We should determine the meaning of these words in accordance with the intent
of the authors.
Counter-counterpoint: All constitutions, statutes, and contracts involve some
compromise of different interests and principles. It is impossible to say what the
agreement waswhat the terms of the compromise wereexcept by looking at the
text itself.
4.2 Original Intent and Evolution
In any debate about the meaning of a textbe it a contract, a statute, a constitution, or a
treatyone argument that has significant power is the argument that we should understand
the texts meaning as the parties originally understood it. This approach makes a good deal of
intuitive sense, especially with a recent contract: freedom of contract is generally a good idea,
and if the parties had an understanding, it probably is best simply to give the contract the
meaning originally understood. Reference to the original intent of the parties also makes a good
deal of sense for a judge interpreting a statute or treaty; the judge should not usurp legislative
power, but instead should seek to be faithful to the intent of the legislators.
For a U.S. citizen, it is impossible to begin to speak about interpretation without mentioning the
debate between the originaliststhose who wish to assign to the U.S. Constitution only and
precisely the meaning intended by the foundersand those who believe that the words of the
Constitution should be interpreted by reference to current circumstances and values. This
debate is not just relevant for constitutions. Interpreters of statutes or contracts, which are
generally more recent and more malleable than constitutions, must also choose between
original intent and a more evolutionary method of interpretation.
This section will address three approaches to original intent.
1. Subjective original intent: Ask what the authors had specifically in mind.
2. Objective original intent: Ask what the words that the authors used generally meant at
the time the authors used them.
3. Objective original intent with intended evolutionary change: Ask what the words that
the authors used generally meant at the time the authors used them, but also assume
that the authors intended for their words to develop new meanings as the world
changed over time and language in common contemporaneous use adapted.
All three of these approaches are attempts at fidelity to the purpose of the legislators or parties
to a contract, and any of the three can be understood as consistent with the wishes of the
authors of the text. Indeed, a wise legislator or contracting party might in the legislation or
contract tell future interpreters how they wish their words to be interpreted. The common core
value here is to do what was intended; the argument is about how to infer intent. But there may
be room to select an approach to original intent that focuses on the intent that is most
consistent with your preferred interpretation.
In its strongest form, originalism in the U.S. constitutional context requires that the law should
be interpreted precisely as the authorsthe framers of the Constitutionsubjectively
intended. Given the reverence Americans feel for our founding generation, and for the original
ideas in the Constitution, it is easy to see the attraction of subjective original intent. However,
there are several problems with this type of argument.
One problem with originalism generally is that, over time, the original understanding becomes
less able to address current problems. Remember that texts are always incompletethey dont
address every contingency that might occur. Whats more, over time, our texts tend to become
even more incomplete; the world changes in ways that are increasingly unanticipated. In the
words of the political scientist Ray Vernon, all bargains obsolesce.
This challenge is not necessarily a reason for judges to step in and complete the incomplete
texts, but there may be circumstances where it would make perfect sense to assign this task to
judges. In U.S. constitutional or statutory debate, the question is often about what has been
assigned to judges. Interestingly, those who argue for interpretation in accordance with original
intent on the basis that this approach provides greater deference to the legislature are
completing the text in their own way. They are constructing a rule of interpretation that is not
within the text. This criticism applies to all the rules of interpretation described here, except
where there is a positive law rule provided by legislators that instructs judges as to how to
interpret the relevant texts. We see this in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
concerning international law.
An additional problem with originalism is that there may not have been a unitary original
understanding. Indeed, negotiations of contracts, statutes, constitutions, and treaties often
involve some level of agreement to disagree. The parties might have been able to agree on
the words, without agreeing on how they would be applied. Contracts have at least two parties,
and in a liberal society, legislation requires the votes of multiple legislators.
The pragmatic Chinese adage, same bed, different dreams, is aptly applied to the making of contracts or law by
multiple authors.
This concern requires us to distinguish between subjective intent and objective intent. By
objective intent, we mean we can reasonably infer intent from objective evidence. That
evidence may be sought only in the text itself, in the context and purpose of the document, or,
with some dangers, in the legislative history or working papers leading up to the document. The
danger of legislative history or working papers is that it is not always clear what we can learn
from these records.
Let me give you a telling example of this problem. Assume that in the negotiation of a contract,
Party A wrote a message to Party B saying, We must include in this contract an arrangement so
that if the price of oil rises, the price required to be paid for the goods will also rise. Then,
assume further that the text of the eventual contract does not include any such clause, but
contains some ambiguous language to the effect that the price will be subject to adjustment as
appropriate.
The price of oil rises, and Party A claims that the price of the goods is required by the contract
to be adjusted to reflect the rise in the price of oil pursuant to the quoted language. Party A
argues that its message is evidence of the intent that the language stating that the price will be
subject to adjustment as appropriate was intended to provide for price escalation in case of a
rise in the price of oil. Party B responds negatively, saying, We discussed that and did not
include an oil price escalation clause in the contract, therefore you have no right to an increased
price for the goods. From Party Bs standpoint the quoted language contemplates negotiation
of any change in prices, with each party having a right to withhold consent, rather than an
automatic escalation.
In this case, the subjective intent of Party A may indeed have been to include an arrangement
for automatic escalation, but it is not by any means evident that Party B agreed to that
arrangement. More importantly, that specific arrangement did not become part of the text of
their contract. The evidence that it was proposed in more specific terms and not included as
such in the text actually undermines Party As case.
Hundreds of books and thousands of scholarly articles have been written debating the correct
method of interpretation for the U.S. Constitution. Beginning in the 1970s, a conservative legal
movement sought to establish the use of original intent as the basis for interpretation.
Because of problems in developing evidence of the original intent of the framers, and because
of evidence of varying original intents, in the 1980s, this approach moved from a search for
actual original intent to a search for original public meaning of the words in the text: from
subjective original intent to objective original intent. The question became not what did the
framers subjectively intend, but what was the objective meaning of these words when the
framers used them. Perhaps the most notable proponent of an approach that focuses on the
original meaning of the text, as opposed to the subjective original intent of the founders, is
Justice Antonin Scalia of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Originalism of both typessubjective and objectiveseeks to constrain judicial discretion,
holding that the meaning of the Constitution during the founding era should control its meaning
today. This effort has been viewed in political terms as supporting a particular conservative legal
agenda by reducing the scope for argument that more progressive rights are protected in the
U.S. Constitution. Under this type of interpretation, for example, there would be no protection
for abortion rights or same-sex relations and no limits on the right to bear arms.
Interestingly, liberals have found that original intent is not just for conservatives any more. A
group of scholars known as the new textualists argue that the original understanding of the
U.S. Constitution included support for more progressive values. This development illustrates the
methodological point that you must research the original intent before acquiescing in an
opponents assertion of original intent. Often, the original intent will have some ambiguity. Few
of our current debates are completely new.
In the U.S. constitutional context, part of the ambiguity comes from different values included in
different provisions. The original intent associated with one provision might be at odds with the
original intent associated with another. We are often of different minds, depending on the
context, and it is possible for our texts to exhibit this ambivalence. So, the original intent of the
Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution may indeed envision limits on the legislative power of
the U.S. federal government, but a number of other provisions of the U.S. Constitution, relating
to the power to tax, the foreign affairs power, the commander-in-chief power of the President,
etc., may have been intended to provide broader powers under particular circumstances.
An evolutionary approach to interpretation might be criticized by some as breaking faith with
the vision of the framers of the Constitution or the authors of a contract. However, an
alternative view is that the best way to honor original intent is to view the legal text as an
evolving, living text, the meaning of which changes over time as societys understanding of the
meaning of words changes. This latter view continues to the effect that if we did not view the
text in this way the scope of coverage and the fidelity to the original intent would decline
would obsolesceover time. Think of the U.S. Constitutions prohibition of cruel and unusual
punishment. What was considered cruel and unusual in 1787 may be quite a bit more limited
than what is considered cruel and unusual today, after the evolution of social sensibilities. So, is
it faithful to the original intent simply to ignore these changes to the content of the words
cruel and unusual?
In Lockett v. Ohio (1978), a plurality of the U.S. Supreme Court found that automatic imposition of the death
penalty for specified grave offenses violated the constitutional prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment, even
though it had not been viewed as cruel and unusual before. The Court referred to societys evolving standards of
decency.
By the way, just to show how original intent can be used for alternative political purposes, lets
consider the U.S. Constitutions Second Amendment right to bear arms. If the original intent is
considered to protect the right to bear the arms that were available in 1787, then people would
only have the right to bear muskets because that was the only type of firearm available at that
time. Modern firearms, using integrated bullets instead of balls and shot, and having magazines
or other multiple shot mechanisms, would be excluded from the right to bear arms. There were
no assault weapons in 1787. It is tough to find a way to distinguish this limited reading of the
Second Amendment from the limited reading of the prohibition of cruel and unusual
punishment.
Let me provide an example from the area of international trade law. In the 1990s, the U.S.
Congress passed legislation requiring that U.S. shrimp fishermen take special precautions to
protect sea turtles from being killed in their shrimping nets. As a way to protect the continuing
competitiveness of U.S. fishermen, the U.S. also legislated that shrimp could only be imported
from foreign countries that had similar protections for turtles. However, the law of the WTO
contained a provision outlawing quotas or prohibitions on imports.
The law of the WTO also contained an exception to its prohibition on quotas, available for
measures taken to protect exhaustible natural resources. There was evidence that when these
words were first written in 1947, the authors of the predecessor treaty intended to cover only
mineral resources. Animals such as sea turtles were not seen as exhaustible because they
reproduced on their own. At that time, the idea of endangered species had not yet emerged.
So, how should a judge rule on whether this exception is available to allow the U.S. import
restrictions? Subjective original intent focusing on what the 1947 authors had in mind would
probably deny the exception the U.S. needed. Even objective original intent focusing on what
exhaustible natural resources meant in 1947 would mean striking down the U.S. measure.
The WTO court opted instead for an evolutionary interpretation: the words exhaustible natural
resources are required to be interpreted in the light of contemporary concerns of the
community of nations about the protection and conservation of the environment. 9 Indeed, the
WTO court focused on the plain meaning of the terms exhaustible natural resources in a
way that was inconsistent with the subjective original intent: if they are natural resources, and if
they are in fact exhaustible, then the exception is available. You might call this evolutionary
plain meaning. While the plain meaning of exhaustible natural resources did not include
living organisms in 1947, it did in the 1990s.
Point: We should interpret this contract in accordance with the original
intent.Counterpoint:
i. Do you have evidence of your proposed original intent beyond the text of the
contract itself?
ii. That may have been your original intent, but it was not mine. I have evidence
that the original intent favors my position.
iii. Times have changed, and we must understand these words according to current
understandings and needs. The original intent included an intent that the agreement
would evolve as the meanings of words changed over time, and that tribunals
charged with interpreting the agreement would use these evolved meanings.
Therefore original intent and evolutionary interpretation are not necessarily
inconsistent.
Counter-counterpoint: It is only the act of making this legal document according to
prescribed procedures that gives it legal authority. Therefore, any interpretation that
departs from the original intent lacks legal authority.Counter-counter-counterpoint:
It is equally plausible that the authors anticipated, indeed desired, that the meaning
of the words that they used would evolve, as it is that they hoped that the meaning
of the words would be frozen in time. If the former, it would be illegitimate to
frustrate their evolutionary intent.
4.3 Context, Purpose, and Principles
It is natural to interpret words based on the context in which they are used. After all, attention
to context is an important part of how we learn to use language. And it seems natural that if an
agreement or treaty refers to a ton, then in the U.S., we would think of a short ton of 2000
pounds, in the U.K., we might think of a long ton of 2240 pounds, and in France we might think
of a metric ton of 1000 kilograms. What about a contract between a U.S. and a French entity?
One of the most attractive methods of legal interpretation is to refer to the context. However,
there may be different types of context available to reference, and much will depend on the
scope of the context, and the orientation of the context, that is considered. For example, if the
context is a technical area where certain words have particular meanings, then an interpreter
should use those particular meanings. Most would argue that the context should include the
rest of the document subject to interpretation, and others would say that the context could also
include other related laws or contracts. The idea is that the rest of the document, or related
documents, can provide clues as to what the authors meant.
Extending beyond the plain meaning, the original intent, and the context of a statute, treaty, or
contract, another approach is to argue that documents should be interpreted in light of, and
consistent with, their purpose. Here, the question is what is the purpose, and how do we know
the purpose of a negotiated document other than by reading the words themselves? One
answer is to look at the preamble (the whereas clauses or lead-in) to identify the purpose.
This is why the preamble of a contract, statute, or treaty is often subject to negotiation by
sophisticated parties, despite the fact that it does not itself have operative effect. They know
that in a dispute, the preamble will be used as a source of context or purpose to interpret the
statute or contract.
However, preambles are often somewhat soft and lacking in specificity, so it is possible to
argue that they do not provide sufficient evidence of context or purpose. It is also possible to
argue that the operative text results from compromises in the purpose of the agreement or law,
so it would be inappropriate to interpret the document in light of one of these purposes alone.
A particular type of statutory or constitutional interpretation, sometimes used by European
jurists, is principles-based interpretation. Here, the method is to divine the principles that are
embedded in the constitution, statute, or treaty, and then interpret everything in the document
with those principles in mind. This type of principles-based interpretation is useful where your
position is supported by the principles that are found in the document. What if your position is
not supported by these principles?
If your position is not supported by the principles found in the document, you could argue that
principles-based interpretation is inappropriate. However, it might appear, shall we say,
unprincipled to argue against principles-based interpretation. In that case, you could argue that
the document at issue represents some compromise among different principles, or that it was
manifestly not intended to carry out the referenced principle in full. If it is a compromise among
different principles, or a limited expression of the referenced principle, then there can be no
assurance that interpretation in accordance with the referenced principle will be accurate.
Furthermore, you might argue that the principles cannot be identified. Some contracts,
statutes, and treaties will contain preambles or whereas clauses, expressing the principles
that they are intended to effectuate. However, again, one might respond that these principles
are only intended to be effectuated to the extent that the operative language of the contract,
statute, or treaty, actually does so. In effect, you would argue that the plain meaning trumps the
principles.
Point: This contract or statute should be interpreted in such a way as to (a) effect its
principles or (b) achieve its purpose.Counterpoint: How do you know what its
principles are, or what its purpose is, and how far the legislators or parties intended
to effect that principle or achieve that purpose? There are few things we would wish
to achieve at any cost, or without qualification.
4.4 Four Corners Versus Preparatory Materials: The Parol Evidence Rule
Lawyers are careful about what they say and what they write down during negotiations. This is
because their preparatory materials, including drafts, letters, memos, etc., can be used as
evidence of the meaning of the document negotiated. It is possible, in a contract or perhaps in
other documents, to insert a clause (called an integration or merger clause) stating that this is
not permittedthat the contract itself is the total and exclusive expression of the agreement
between the parties. Often, there is some inconsistency between what is promised formally and
what is said informally. Additionally, there may be some inconsistency between what is said at
one time and what is said at a later time. Arguments can arise about what is the real deal
whether the original deal was changed, and whether it could be changed by later (or earlier)
discussions.
Lets say that you are buying a car from a friend. You and she agree that the car will be sold as
is, meaning that she is not responsible for any mechanical problems it might have. Then later,
but prior to the purchase, as you are test-driving it, you see that the oil pressure light is on.
She says, Dont worry about it. She tells you that it has been on for a while and her mechanic
said that it just means that the emissions control mechanism needs to be adjusteda minor
service that can be carried out at the next oil change. After you buy the car, the engine seizes up
and fails, and the car needs a new engine that will cost more than you paid for the car. The
mechanic you hire tells you that the oil pressure light probably warned that oil was not
circulating properly. You complain to your former friendyou know, the one who sold you the
carthat she should be responsible for the damage caused by the failure to heed the oil
pressure signal. She responds that she is not responsible because the car was sold as is.
Point: The formal (or more comprehensive) arrangement overrides any prior or
subsequent informal modifications.Counterpoint: You should be responsible for what
you said, even if it was not included in the formal arrangement.Countercounterpoint:
If you meant to rely on it, you should have asked that it be included in
the formal arrangement.Counterpoint 2: The specific point made outside the
comprehensive arrangement controls the more general statement in the
comprehensive arrangement. (See lex specialis discussed in 4.10.)
The parol evidence rule, applicable in many countries, holds that if two parties make a contract,
and if they demonstrate the intent that the contract is the final and complete statement of their
relationship, no prior or subsequent additional communication, whether written or oral, can be
used to show a modification or a different meaning of the contract. As you can see, the parol
evidence rule plays a substantive role similar to a merger clause that may be included in the
contract. The basic point here is that if you intend a special meaning or a special deal that does
not appear in the contract itself, you are unlikely to be able to rely on it in litigation.
It is easy to be tricked, intentionally or unintentionally, by someone who seems to agree
informally to a modification to the formal arrangement, while the formal agreement specifies
that no informal modifications are to be effective. These informal modifications, even if in
writing, wont be formally effective.
Salespeople of all types have one major goal: they want to make a sale. And so, they may
sometimes make statements about their product, or about the arrangements for the sale of the
product, on which they cannot deliver. Their companys legal department, however, has a
different set of incentives and supplies the salespeople with a form contract that will specify
that informal modifications are rejected, and the only warranties are the written ones provided
within the contract. The law departments language will likely be effective to protect any
overzealous salespeople, and the company, from responsibility and to deny customers the rights
or protections they might have been told separately they would receive.
4.5 Extensional Pruning
In 1998, then-U.S. President Bill Clinton famously stated, I did not have sexual relations with that woman,
speaking of Monica Lewinsky. He seemed to be hoping that the public would assume a broad meaning of sexual
relations, while perhaps he was thinking that he was not technically being dishonest under a narrow meaning.
Who knows? Perhaps he was trying to give himself some rhetorical space in case people found out that he had nonintercourse
sex with the intern who will forever be known as that woman.
If you are a politician caught with what some think is a lie (with your pants down, so to speak),
or a party to a contract trying to wiggle out of your obligations, you might switch to a narrow
meaning of a term. This is extensional pruning: initial use of words with what appears to be
their commonly accepted meaning but subsequent transition to a narrower definition in order
to avoid obligations or refutation. In ordinary conversation, we might expect others to use
words in the sense of their ordinary meaning, and the powerful ordinary meaning canon of
interpretation would protect our expectations. But unless you have a way to investigate and get
a definitive adjudication in a court of law or in the court of public opinion, the wiggle might
succeed.
You can imagine how this could come up in a contract setting. A construction company might
agree in its contract to clean up the work site at the conclusion of its construction activities, but
it might later interpret this language not to include cleaning up spills or detritus that flows or
otherwise finds its way off the work site. It moves from an implicit broad meaning of work site
to a narrower one.
Point: I intended a narrow meaning of the operative phrase used in my commitment
to you: just the site on which I worked.Counterpoint: I assumed, I believe rightfully,
that you intended the ordinary broader meaning of the operative phrase.
One of the essential functions of lawyers is to identify wiggle room like this in contracts,
statutes, and treaties and to eliminate it. It takes a careful, imaginative, and suspicious turn of
mind to do it well. While a court might police extensional pruning by insisting on the ordinary
meaning, it may be costly to go to court, and there may be uncertainty as to how the court will
view the language at issue. So, it is best for the person owed the obligation to preempt
extensional pruning by paying close attention to the accuracy and precision of the contractual
words. In negotiations, the person owing the obligation might seek to maximize the scope of
potential extensional pruning.
4.6 Interpretation Versus Construction
To recap: all ruleswhether they are contained in laws or in contractsare necessarily
incomplete. There are two types of incompleteness. First, there is incompleteness in the
delineation of the meaning of words contained in the rules. That is the principal focus of this
chapter. Uncertainty regarding interpretation is a type of incompleteness that can often be
reduced by adding more specific language. Second, and the focus of this section, language we
write today cannot anticipate all the things that can happen in the future. There is
incompleteness in the sense that the rules do not address all of the issues that can come up in
relation to the matters addressed in the law or contract in the fullness of time.
Although there is something fundamentally illegitimate about constructing laws or contracts
so as to fill gaps, the gaps exist nevertheless. As stated above, all documents are incomplete.
The ordinary default rule, and perhaps the best approach, is simply to leave the responsibility
where it falls. The default rule is based on the assumption that the parties did think about the
issue that has come up and decided to leave the responsibility where it falls. This is less
problematic in contract interpretation than in statutory or constitutional interpretation. But you
can imagine a circumstance in which it appears to be unfair to leave the responsibility where it
initially falls, and this is the motivation for construction.
As you negotiate a contract with a counter-party, you should examine what the default
outcomes are with respect to as many issues as you can think of. The default outcome is the
outcome supplied by generally applicable law unless the contract provides otherwise. It may
favor you, in which case you might decide to avoid discussing it. However, if it allocates a
responsibility to you, you might want to make sure that you are adequately compensated for
bearing that responsibility.
The authors of the law or contract may have lacked experience with some issues, or they may
have simply neglected to address some issues that they knew of. In this case, it is possible to
argue that the contract should be completed by construction of additional terms that the
parties would have inserted in the rule if they had thought of them or if they had not been
negligent. Once a dispute arises, the choice is whether to leave things as the terms of the rule
specify, without completing the rule, or to engage in construction. Once a dispute arises, one
party will win if things are left as they are, and the other party will win if the rule is
supplemented by construction.
Think about a circumstance where the performance of a contract is made impossible, or its
purpose is frustrated, by some supervening events. Lets say I agree to sell you my car, but it is
subsequently stolen and cannot be recovered. Further, assume that our contract did not
address this issue. Then, assume you sue me for the car. What should a judge do? She can say
the contract does not say what to do, so my obligation to deliver the car persists, and I must pay
you damages. Or she can construct an additional term as something we would have agreed to
had we thought of this possibility. Actually, most countries general law implicitly constructs an
additional term by virtue of an impossibility or force majeure doctrine, saying under what
circumstances my performance would be excused. I discuss force majeure in Chapter 8.
Point: The contract is incomplete insofar as it fails explicitly to allocate responsibility
for the situation that has occurred, so we should construct an allocation of
responsibility that we believe the parties would have established if they had
addressed it.Counterpoint: Nonsenselet the chips fall where they may. We should
let the responsibility that has not been explicitly allocated remain where it falls
without intervention. If I had been allocated an additional responsibility, I would have
charged you a higher price.
4.7 Interpretation and Morality
The eminent legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin argued that laws must be interpreted in
accordance with a moral perspective. Other lawyers call for a separation between positive
lawlaw as legislatedand morality. Much of this debate can be understood as an argument
about whether judges, when faced with a case, should let their decision be influenced by their
own moral perspective. And, in turn, this issue can be understood as an argument about the
role of judges and about the mandate accorded to judges when they are appointed; does it
include instructions or permission to include morality in their interpretations or other decisionmaking?
As a tool of argument, ones position on the separation of law from morality would depend on
the expected outcome. If I lose on the law considered alone and need the application of
morality in order to win, I can argue for its important role in interpretation. Anything less, I
would argue, would be immoral.
On the other hand, if the application of morality causes me to lose, I can argue that the
legislature, in formulating the law, already made the social decision, including as appropriate all
considerations of morality. Furthermore, I would argue, it would amount to judicial legislation,
and an inappropriate application of the judges own morality in preference to that applied by
the legislature. After all, there is a moral argument for upholding the rule of law or the
requirements of a contract. Procedural justice can countervail substantive justice.
Point: Our contract, or my legal obligation, should be understood to be modified so
that it does not produce a morally improper outcome.Counterpoint: The contract is
the contract (or the law is the law). Who knows what morality requires, and besides,
it is morally suspect to challenge the rule of law or to renege on promises. That is,
when you have a legal or contractual rule, there may well be morality on both sides
of the argument. Substantive justice does not necessarily exceed in value procedural
justice.
From the judges standpoint, how much to bring in of ones own moral view would depend on
the mandate to the judge upon appointment: what has the judge been authorized to do? For
some judges, this might not be the end of the matter because the judge might, under some
circumstances, have a civil disobedience-type obligation to ignore the law and apply morality.
Remember that Socrates chose to drink hemlock rather than to follow morality in contravention
of Athens laws. As depicted in Platos Crito dialogue, Socrates had been convicted by a jury of
500 Athenians of impiety and of corrupting the young. He was sentenced to die by drinking
hemlock. His friend Crito tried to convince him to escape rather than to accept the immoral
judgment of the Athenian state. (Socrates had not corrupted the young, but educated them.)
Socrates responded by pointing out that he had lived in Athens as an Athenian citizen, accepting
all of the benefits of its government and laws. On this basis, he had a type of social contract
obligation to continue to accept Athens laws and legal judgments. He saw this as a moral
obligation, even if the judgment at hand was itself immoral. Thus, for Socrates, and Plato, the
law has its own morality, even when its results are immoral.
This idea is related to the point made earlier in this book that procedural justice may at times
outweigh substantive justice. But it cannot be carried too far: the greater the substantive
injustice, and the greater the certainty of substantive injustice, the more difficult it becomes to
argue that there is an obligation to comply with an unjust law.
4.8 Effet Utile, the Presumption of Consistent Usage, and Meaningful Variation
The rule of effet utile, French for useful effect, is an assumption that is made in interpretation
of legal rules or contracts to the effect that the author of the legislation, contract, or treaty
meant to accomplish something by the words used. It rejects an interpretation that would make
a word or a provision ineffective. Without this assumption, it might be open to a party to argue
that the rule as specified does not actually bind any conduct or cause any results. The effet utile
rule forecloses such arguments.
Consider how the effet utile argument would be used outside a legal context. A husband and
wife agree that they will share the work involved in tending their garden. A few weeks later,
considering his alternative leisure time activities, the husband says, But we do not really have a
gardenwe just have a back yard. This makes their agreement uselessa dead letter. The wife
could respond by saying that the husbands proposed interpretation would render their
agreement nullwould deprive it of effet utileand therefore, this interpretation is to be
rejected. In other words, why did we bother to work through an agreement, when you
(husband) are saying it has no bite? Why did I comply with my end of the bargain, while your
end, it turns out, was a mirage?
Furthermore, the effet utile principle requires an assumption that each word is meaningful
that there is no unnecessary repetition or surplus. So it has unintended results if people are
sloppy or like to repeat themselves. This principle was important in a case in which the WTO
treaty requires that states must protect patent rights but may provide limited exceptions to
the exclusive patent rights of the owner. The question was how large was the scope of the term
limited exceptions. The panel, led by my late colleague, the great U.S. trade lawyer Robert
Hudec, held as follows:
The word exception by itself connotes a limited derogation, one that does not undercut the
body of rules from which it is made. When a treaty uses the term limited exception, the word
limited must be given a meaning separate from the limitation implicit in the word exception
itself. The term limited exception must therefore be read to connote a narrow exceptionone
which makes only a small diminution of the rights in question.10
The phrase limited exception, with the assumption that exceptions are always, well,
exceptional and therefore narrow, must have a narrower meaning than the word exception
standing alone. Otherwise, the word limited would have no effet utile.
A corollary of effet utile is the presumption of consistent usage: where a text uses the same
term in multiple places, it is assumed to mean the same thing. Now, I can give you some
examples where assuming a term to mean the same thing in different contexts within the same
text would lead to absurd results. So, the presumption of consistent usage should yield to a
context-based interpretation as well as to the principle described below: the avoidance of
absurdity. Conversely, the presumption of meaningful variation holds that when different terms
are used within a single text, they are presumed to mean different things.
You may be thinking that all these rules of interpretation put a great burden of precision on the
draftsman. And I am here to tell you that draftsmen often fail to carry this burden. So, in real
world terms, the overly rigorous application of effet utile and its corollaries may be
counterproductive, frustrating the ability of draftsmen of agreements and laws to achieve the
purposes they strive, albeit imperfectly, to achieve.
Point: Each word must be ascribed utility and meaning, the use of different words
must mean different things, and the use of the same words must mean the same
thing.Counterpoint: Agreements and laws are sometimes completed after little sleep
and in a hurry, and draftsmen are not perfect. We should be cautious in setting a
standard so high that it will frustrate the imperfectly expressed intent of the parties.
4.9 Avoid Absurdity
Contracts, and statutes, should not be construed in such a way as to make them absurd. This is
known as the British Rule of interpretation. In modern society, however, one persons
absurdity may be anothers desired outcome, so we cannot put too much faith in a sense of the
absurd. The impulse to avoid absurdity is another way of ensuring that the rule that has been
agreed or legislated has some sensible effect, preferably the one intended.
There are two types of absurdity. One is where the text itself seems to be absurd in the sense
that a word or clause is patently wrong or in the sense that it seems to be operating at crosspurposes.
The second is where the result seems strange. The cross-purposes and the strange
result may be matters of degree or may exist only in the eye of the beholder. Therefore, it may
be tough to criticize an outcome as absurd. Even where a word or clause is patently wrong, as in
a clear typographical error, it is not impossible to argue that the contract or law should be
enforced as written or not enforced at all. And sometimes a counter-party who is unhappy with
the arrangement may be uncooperative in correcting the error. Better to proofread.
The Bolognian law . . . which enacted that whoever drew blood in the streets should be punished with the utmost
severity, was held after long debate not to extend to the surgeon, who opened the vein of a person who fell down
in the street with a fit.
William Blackstone, Commentaries
on the Laws of England (1765-1769)
Your first response to this quote from Blackstone (perhaps after you feel gratitude to have
modern medical care available to you) should be, They needed a long debate for that?
Indeed, the long debate was probably occasioned by the concern of textualists that the law be
applied as written, without modification based on the apparent purpose of the law or the
absurdity of punishing a surgeon trying (however ignorantly) to save someones life. In the end,
substance and the avoidance of absurdity won out, but perhaps you can imagine a circumstance
where substance and the avoidance of absurdity might be less appealing, and a tribunal would
decide to let textualism reign, despite its seeming over-inclusiveness.
Point: The application of this contractual provision or law to the case at hand would
be absurdwe cannot assume that the authors intended an absurd
outcome.Counterpoint: We should apply the text as written, and leave it to the
authors to amend their text if the language is defective or if the application to a
particular type of case is undesirable.Counter-counterpoint: The authors assumed
that tribunals and others working with these rules would avoid absurd
results.Counter-counter-counterpoint: How do you know what they thought was
absurd, except by examining the text?
4.10 Lex Specialis: The Assumption That the Specific Trumps the General
Industrialized countries are dense with rules. Rules can have overlapping coverage and may
conflict. Even within contracts, the outcome of a dispute may vary depending on which part of
the contract is applicable. One tool of interpretation used to deal with this problem of conflict is
lex specialis (lex specialis derogat legi generali): when faced with a conflict between rules,
choose the one that applies more specifically to the facts. This approach assumes, perhaps
heroically, that we can distinguish between greater and lesser specificity. The assumption
behind lex specialis is that the more specific provision was more tightly reasoned and more
tightly tailored to the subject, compared to the less specific provision. This is not necessarily so,
but who am I to argue with the great utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham? He said, the
particular provision is established upon a nearer and more exact view of the subject than the
general, of which it may be regarded as a correction. 11
An important example of the lex specialis argument came up in the World Courts Advisory
Opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons. Essentially, the anti-nuclear
weapon side argued that the use of nuclear weapons would violate the human right to life
protected in Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). This
argument was a creative extension of the right to life beyond what the framers of the ICCPR had
probably anticipated.
In the Nuclear Weapons case, there was a special type of contradiction between the laws
regulating armed conflict (international humanitarian law), which did not prohibit the use of
nuclear weapons, and the general prohibition against arbitrary deprivation of life under the
ICCPR. Here, it is not so easy to say that the former is specific, largely because the permission
for use of nuclear weapons under international humanitarian law was never legislatedthere
was no conscious specific law that was affirmatively created. However, the World Court did find
that the rule of permissibility under the laws of war was more specific than the prohibition
against arbitrary deprivation of life and so dominated on the grounds of lex specialis.
Note, interestingly, that this is a special type of conflict insofar as the laws regulating armed
conflict do not require the use of nuclear weapons, and so it would have been possible for a
state to comply with both legal rules simply by not using nuclear weapons. Nevertheless, the lex
specialis won out in the World Court. Here is what the World Court said:
In principle, the right not arbitrarily to be deprived of ones life applies also in hostilities. The
test of what is an arbitrary deprivation of life, however, then falls to be determined by the
applicable lex specialis, namely, the law applicable in armed conflict, which is designed to
regulate the conduct of hostilities. Thus whether a particular loss of life, through the use of a
certain weapon in warfare, is to be considered an arbitrary deprivation of life contrary to Article
6 of the [ICCPR], can only be decided by reference to the law applicable in armed conflict and
not deduced from the terms of the [ICCPR] itself.12
The lex specialis rule of interpretation also applies in private contracts, where the agreement
has two contradictory rules. In both laws and contracts, so long as the draftsman is aware of lex
specialis, it is appropriate to apply it. Yet, the careful draftsman will not rely on this principle to
establish hierarchies within a law or a contract, so we may even draw a contrary inference: that
the draftsman was unaware of any conflict between two rules and expressed no intent as to
whichthe more specific or the more generalis to dominate. Where there is evidence that
the draftsman or parties had a different hierarchy of normsplacing the more general above
the more specificthere is no particular reason to follow lex specialis.
Point: We have two conflicting principles, so the more specialized one should take
priority over the more general one.Counterpoint:
i. How can you determine which is the more specialized principle?
ii. The more general principle should supervene the more specific one, because it is
a broader principle.
Counter-counterpoint: The more specific principle obviously reflects the more
specific intent of the legislators or of the parties to the contract.Countercounterpoint:
Lex specialis seems to be a way of inferring the intent of the parties as
to which norm should trump the other. If there is better evidence of intent, we
should use it.
4.11 Expressio Unius (and Ejusdem Generis): Examples Matter
Expressio unius is another canon of interpretation. The full expression is expressio unius est
exclusio alterius, meaning that the express mention of one thing excludes all others. It
recognizes that positive statements can serve as the basis for negative inferences, and it works
like this. If we list a group of items that are covered by our agreement, and there is another type
of item like those listed that is not on the list, then we must have intended to exclude the
additional type of item. That is, listing some things of a particular type and omitting other things
of that type is presumed to be intentional. As you can see, it is motivated to some extent by the
same idea as the effet utile principlewe assume that draftsmen know what theyre doing.
You can no doubt imagine making just the opposite argument. For example, we listed sailboats,
motorboats, rowboats, and canoesof course, we meant to include kayaksfor almost all
purposes, theres no salient difference. Even more surprising, if a general category is expressed,
and examples follow, the examples may have the effect of limiting the scope of the general
category. This is the interpretive principle of ejusdem generis, and it is understood as a more
refined version of expressio unius.
Furthermore, the expressio unius principle is highly dependent on context. It may indeed be the
case that the thing or things mentioned are simply the most common or well-known items, but
we implicitly intended for other items to be covered as well. This situation is more likely to
occur in an informal circumstance as opposed to a formal context involving a contract or a
statute.
Expressio unius is a rule of interpretation that assumes knowledge and intent on the part of the
draftsman. It assumes that the draftsman knew about kayaks and must have intentionally
omitted them from the list. In the real world, including the real legal world, draftsmen often fail
to meet this standard. The result is that expressio unius may be quite inconsistent with the
draftsmans intent.
Children have used the expressio unius rule to their advantage from time immemorial. If their
mother tells them not to watch television or play computer games, they will play the games on
their cell phone or on another portable gaming device. The parent will remonstrate with the
child to the effect that I meant all electronic entertainment, while the child will respond that
the parent did not mention cell phones.
There are many examples of legal disputes in which the expressio unius card was played. In
constitutional adjudication in the U.S., and also in many types of statutory interpretation,
questions often come up regarding the powers of branches of government or of administrative
agencies. A leading case mentioned earlier, Marbury v. Madison, is an example. There, as you
may recall, the question was the scope of power of review accorded by the U.S. Constitution to
federal courts. Because certain types of cases were mentioned in the Constitution as within the
federal judicial power, but the particular type at issue was not, the Supreme Court found that
the judicial power did not include the unlisted type of issue.
One anticipatory response to an expressio unius ploy is to specify a catchall category. Parents
learn quickly to formulate their instructions this way: Do not use the television, computer
games, or any other electronics. Contracts and statutes may use the same device. Then the
argument becomes whether the specific items mentioned may be used to interpretto restrict
the scope ofthe catchall category under ejusdem generis. Lawyers avoid this by explicit
statements, such as including, without limitation, television and computer games.
Suppose that the child, under the restriction including the catchall, begins to engage in text
messaging conversations with friends. The parent might argue that it is a form of electronic
entertainment and therefore a violation of the prohibition. The child might argue that texting is
communication, not entertainment, and the childs argument might be bolstered by the fact
that the specifically listed itemstelevision and computer gamesare not the same type of
communication. The ejusdem generis principle supports the childs argument: the specification
of examples tends to restrict the general category of which they are examples. Therefore, from
this standpoint, the parent could establish the broader prohibition by simply prohibiting the
general category of electronics, without listing examples. Alternatively, the parent could use the
lawyers phrase including, without limitation in his instructions to his child. It takes a lot of
restraint not to do so.
Two abbreviations are relevant here: i.e. and e.g. I.e. is an abbreviation for the Latin words id
est, which mean that is. E.g. is an abbreviation for the Latin words exempli gratia, which
mean for the sake of example. Their effects differ dramatically. I.e. indicates that what
follows is a paraphrase of the prior clause, while e.g. means what follows are examples of a
broader covered category. E.g. implies an incomplete listthat other things in the category
are intended. So, i.e. allows an expressio unius argument, while e.g. blocks the expressio
unius argument, as a somewhat less explicit alternative to saying including, without limitation.
Point: We listed the types of things included, and the thing at issue is not on the
listtherefore, it is not included and can be presumed to be intentionally
excluded.Counterpoint: The thing at issue is of a similar type to those on the list,
raising the same concerns. The listing should be understood as a specification of
examples, and the interpreter should construe the list to include other things of
similar type.Counter-counterpoint: The draftsman of the text knew about those
other things, and so it makes sense to assume that they were intentionally excluded.
4.12 Clear Statement Rules, Interpretation Against the Draftsman, and the Rule of
Lenity
Sometimes it makes sense to put the burden of clear speaking on the rule-maker or, in
contractual settings, on the person who takes responsibility for writing down the rule. This is
known as a clear statement rule.
In criminal cases, it may be unfair, and a violation of rights to due process of law, to prosecute
someone criminally under a vague rule. If it is vague, it may be difficult to determine how to
comply, and the rule may be subject to inconsistent interpretation and application. The rule of
lenity says that vague criminal statutes should be construed in favor of the defendant.
But sometimes an interpretive rule, such as a clear statement rule, is intended to put the
burden of actually deciding, and of paying the political or public relations costs of deciding, on
the legislature instead of on the tribunal charged with applying the rule. If the statement is not
clear, and the tribunal applies it in an unpopular way, then the tribunal bears the political costs,
while the legislature avoids the political costs. So, clear statement rules are a way for courts to
avoid responsibility and put the onus of decision on the legislature.
Clear statement rules are also a way for courts to defend certain principles, again by forcing the
legislature to bear the political costs of contradicting the principle clearly rather than in an
obtuse way. Clear statement rules provide that the legislature may only contradict the protected
principle if it does so clearly. Without a clear statement rule, the legislature can contradict the
principle in an obtuse way, and blame the court for doing the damage to the principle rather
than bearing the blame themselves.
Clear statement rules have been used to great effect in the context of the power of Congress to
legislate under the U.S. Constitution. In this context, clear statement rules are applied in cases
in which the federal government has a certain ultimate power, so there is no direct
constitutional restriction on Congress exercise of the power. However, the exercise of the
power is seen as threatening to a constitutional or other principle or value (as opposed to a firm
rule), and so the U.S. Supreme Court has developed these clear statement rules to require
Congress to act affirmatively and clearly if it wishes to make incursions on these principles. Yes,
it is a form of judicial activism, and you might well ask where the courts get the power to divine
principles and establish special protections for them.
For example, one prominent clear statement rule established by the U.S. Supreme Court holds
that absent a clear statement to the contrary, statutes are not to be interpreted to intrude upon
the sovereignty of the states by regulating state activities.13
Point: (in the context of U.S. constitutional law): Where a statute would operate to
reduce the achievement of a constitutional value, it shall be interpreted as doing so
only where the legislature has done so in a clear statement. This is to ensure that the
expected political accountability of legislators for impairing this constitutional value
can be effective.Counterpoint:
i. It seems an inappropriate exercise of judicial power to develop these prioritized
values that do not appear in the text of the Constitution.
ii. It is difficult, and seems highly subjective, to determine which statements are
clear and which are not.
Counter-counterpoint: (as to counterpoint (i)): Assuming that legislatures are well
aware of the judicially-applied clear statement rule, the legislature is capable of
stating its intent clearly, so there is no judicial usurpation.Counter-countercounterpoint:
But this puts inappropriate pressure on the legislature to state certain
things clearly, and even to bear certain political costs, in a way that is not prescribed
in the Constitution.
A related principle of interpretation comes up in contracts, where it is sometimes argued that if
there is an ambiguity in the contract, it should be resolved in a way that is adverse to the party
responsible for the drafting of the contract.
For example, there is a case in which Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) experienced losses due to
action by a contractor that damaged one of PG&Es electric turbines.14 PG&E had used a form
contract to procure the contractors services. In the contract, there was a clause providing an
indemnity to PG&E for all loss, damage, expense and liability resulting from injury to or
death of person or injury to property, arising out of or in any way connected with the
performance of this contract.
The question for the court was whether an indemnity was intended to protect PG&E from
losses it incurred directly or only for losses it incurred by virtue of claims by third persons. The
court found that under California law, an indemnity is a contract by which one engages to save
another from a legal consequence of the conduct of one of the parties, or of some other
person. Furthermore, a legal consequence is one imposed by law.
Here, PG&E had direct losses, and its losses were not understood as imposed by law. So, these
losses did not seem to qualify for an indemnity. Even so, the court found that there was
ambiguity because of the clear text of the indemnity relating to loss  resulting from injury to
property. However, it determined to resolve the ambiguity against the draftsman of the form
contract, PG&E, and therefore found that the contractor was not required to pay PG&E under
the indemnity clause.
Point: Any ambiguity in this agreement should be resolved against the position of the
person responsible for drafting it.Counterpoint: It takes two to tango: this document
was accepted by both of us, so we are both responsible for it. It would be strange to
punish those who take on the responsibility of drafting by having a rule that resolves
ambiguity against their interests.
4.13 Reductio Ad Absurdum, the Camels Nose, the Slippery Slope, the Parade of
Horribles, and the Thin Entering Wedge
All the terms in the title refer to the same thing: the extension of a proposed principle to absurd
or undesirable lengths. I will refer to them all as reductio ad absurdam, because that is the
most common term for the ploy. Law professors are the masters of reductio ad absurdum. They
induce unsuspecting law students to espouse some proposition and then come up with
increasingly absurd hypotheticals to show that the proposition is untenable. Try this with your
friends, and they will soon be ex-friends. The proposition becomes untenable because it
ultimately conflicts with another principle that is important to its proponent.
This ploy points out the consequences of generalization of an opponents position. In this sense,
reductio ad absurdam is based on an assumption of consistent treatment of like cases. It is an
effective tool in the legal system where, as is addressed in greater detail in Chapter 5 below,
consistency is a core systemic value.
For example, suppose that your opponent argues that it is obvious that people should not fly
because they were not born with wings. You can point out in response that perhaps people also
should not ride on bicycles or in cars, because they were not born with wheels. The generalized
proposition is that people should not use modes of transport unless they were born with the
relevant equipment. You are simply pointing out that the generalized proposition encompasses
more than the speaker probably intended, and more than could possibly make sense.
From a negative perspective, reductio ad absurdam argues that if you adopt the threatened
approach, or interpretation, or policy, you will need to apply the rule to restrict conduct in far
more cases where it would be absurd or unappealing to do so. From a positive perspective (this
is often called the camels nose or the parade of horribles), it argues that if you allow the
conduct at hand to go unrestricted, there will be a lot more such conduct. In this latter form, it
may even be an argument about demonstration effects or incentive effects: once you drop your
guard, you will have lots of similar cases, and they will destroy your position.
The most effective strategy in response to a camels nose or slippery slope argument is to
distinguish cases: to explain why the case at hand is different from the parade of horribles your
opponent has conjured. You should anticipate the parade of horribles and make clear at the
outset that your principle is limited to a reasonable range of cases that includes the case at
hand. A bit of extensional pruning might be in order.
Another effective strategy is to point out that other similar types of distinctions have been
made without the camels nose, slippery slope, or parade of horribles coming to pass. We
actually are in control of our destiny and must make nuanced and reasoned distinctions.
Point: If we accepted your principle, while the results would not be unacceptable in
the case at hand, the result would be absurd, or horrible, in other cases where it
might be extended.Counterpoint: All things in moderationthere is no need for such
an extension, and the absurd or horrible cases you posit are not before us.Countercounterpoint:
But it is the principle of the thing; once we establish the principle that
you argue for, we will not be able to hold back the absurd and the horrible.
5
Arguing From Precedent
An argument in which the advocates desired outcome is consistent with past action is
remarkably persuasive for a number of reasons. The reference to precedent has intrinsic appeal,
insofar as consistency is a good thing. Consistency, where there is no good reason for
inconsistency, is beneficial in order to promote predictability and to avoid the effects of bias.
Consistency preempts challenges arguing that the decision seems to be based on the rule of
men, not the rule of law.
We do not need a sophisticated, modern legal system to see the appeal of precedent. Imagine a
primitive group of village elders faced with a problem or a dispute. Anthropologists report that
they will often turn to precedenthow did we deal with this last time?in order to determine
how to deal with it this time. This is one of the reasons elders have these decision-making
rolesthey have greater knowledge of precedent than the younger generation. The wisdom of
elders is, in part, based on experience.
Consistency also helps to economize on decision-making resources. Instead of reinventing the
wheel every time, we just follow the way we did it last time. You can immediately see the value
as well as the limitation there: we may have done it wrong last time, or times may have
changed, so we should not just follow our prior decision.
The common law system has brought this consistency-based style of argument to its highest
form, and so it is worthy of our study. Australia, Canada, Ghana, Hong Kong, India, Ireland,
Israel, Jamaica, New Zealand, Pakistan, Singapore, Uganda, the United Kingdom, and the United
States are some of the principal common law countries. Common law is a system that
supplements legislative law with judge-made law. The judges dont actually legislate in the
conventional sense, but their decisions in particular litigated cases are taken as binding
precedent. This judge-made law may interpret statutes, or it may elaborate new rules from
scratch, as in certain areas of contract, property, or tort. Civil law countries (most of the rest of
the world, except for those following Islamic law, which also has a system for judge-made law)
do not have a rule of binding precedent, but they also value consistency, so the differences in
this regard are subtler than they may at first appear.
Also, note that judges who say (1) they will not engage in judicial legislation, and (2) they will
respect existing precedent are saying something somewhat inconsistent: that they will respect
prior judicial legislation but not engage in judicial legislation themselves. Their approach may be
understood as conservative in the non-political sense: dont change anything. Alternatively, they
may be understood as advocating a new rule of greater deference to legislatures, while also
maintaining deference to prior judicial legislation.
Point: We should follow precedent.Counterpoint:
i. Yes, but the precedent you rely on is distinguishable from the present case.
ii. No, that precedent never made sense, or no longer does.
5.1 Consistency and Law
Recall Ralph Waldo Emersons aphorism, A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.
Well, consistency is the watchword of the law, so you might infer that lawyers have little minds.
In order to avoid such inferences, and hobgoblins (good but troublesome fairies), lets put the
emphasis on the word foolish. So, to coin a phrase, sensible consistency is the watchword of
the law. This is true for all legal systems, not just common law systems.
Indeed, if we are to follow John Quincy Adams call for a government of laws and not of men,
then consistency is required so that those laws mean the same thing every time they are
applied. Otherwise, to the extent that the variation is controlled by men, it is a government of
men. The very nature of a legal system, as opposed to a system of government by fiat of
individuals, requires consistency. Lawyers may have little minds, but you may wish to join us in
demanding consistency. Consistency is a bulwark against discrimination and corruption.
Arguments for consistency are founded in the very notion of a liberal democracy and are also
founded in fairness. Inconsistency, by its nature, requires the treatment of one person worse
than another. Some might say that we are not treating one person worsewe are just treating
the other better. If that argument raises your suspicions, you are right: it is nonsense. This kind
of statement may be made in connection with arguments about affirmative action: providing
better treatment to members of disadvantaged groups. However, one cannot defend affirmative
action by saying, falsely, that no one is treated worserather one must have a suitable rationale
for different treatment.
Sensible consistency in the application of law is essential to a free society. But consistency is
remarkably difficult to define. In order to determine what consistency means in particular
situations, we must determine the basis for the rule, and for any exceptions to the rule.
Consistency requires that a different treatment apply only where the rationale for the rule is
inapplicable or the basis for an exception is applicable. Its all about determining the conditions
for application of the rule: getting the if-then statement right.
Consistency of treatment is akin to non-discrimination. While we all may feel that we know
discrimination when we see it, intuitively, there is a great deal of room for careful analysis. Is it
discrimination to allow a person suffering from dyslexia extra time to answer questions on an
exam? Is it discrimination not to do so? Or is it discrimination to fail to allow a person not
suffering from dyslexia the same amount of time? Is it discrimination to charge a higher sales
tax on cars that get worse gas mileage? What if opponents of the government in power own the
company that makes the cars with worse gas mileage? How do you decide?
The same types of questions may be raised about the application of precedent. The core
question is, as mentioned above, what does it mean to be consistent? The answer to that
question depends on what the precedent iswhat the baseline treatment is. We can look at
prior cases and argue about what they mean in terms of the baseline. We are arguing, then,
about the scope of the precedent and the basis for deciding the case, known in the legal lexicon
as the ratio decidendiLatin for the rule of decision.
In the legal process in common law systems, courts formally seek consistency. In order to act
consistently, they must first draw the essence, or find the ratio decidendi, from past decisions.
And doing so often involves some discretion. So much for consistency. So much for the rule of
law. Before we despair, we must recognize that the process of identifying the ratio decidendi is
not so much, or at least is not completely, the responsibility of an individual judge. Rather, the
essence is stated and restated in cases and commentaries, and by this statement and
restatement it becomes more rigid. The legal process and the lawyers professional training
serve to guide or to constrain the decision by any particular judge. If everyone involved in a
dispute understands how precedent is derived, and can appreciate how closely the judge
follows precedent, then there are powerful social pressures on the judge to conform.
As I have stressed repeatedly, the law, like other rules, is by its nature incomplete. Within the
legal system, we use the mechanism of interpretation, often carried out by courts, to complete
it in particular casesto determine how to apply it to particular cases. In order to apply the law
consistently, it must be interpreted consistently. Incompleteness is a problem not just of
statutes and contracts, but also of the common law. Indeed, we can understand the common
law as a mechanism for incremental decentralized completion of incomplete legal rules.
Under our necessarily incomplete laws, it is not always easy to agree on what it means to be
consistent. In effect, the laws are incomplete ex ante (when they are written, and before they
are applied) because it is too costly, and in many cases impractical, to make them more
complete. In order to determine whether the law is being applied consistently, we must identify
the rationale for the interpretation in prior cases and determine whether it fits the current case.
Ex postwhen it comes time to apply the lawsyou can imagine that there are strong
incentives for the parties in dispute to disagree on how the law should be completed. In a
sense, what makes it possible to write laws is that we are to a degree unaware of the specific
distributive outcome of writing the law. We do not yet know all the specifics of who will benefit
and who will be harmed. Once we know, in a particular case, there is a lot more to argue about.
5.2 The Salience of Precedent
Lawyers, especially common law lawyers, like precedent, but so does everyone else. When
faced with a new problem, it is not a bad thing to ask first, how did we deal with this issue the
last time it arose? One rationale for this instinct is simply laziness, or, as some like to call it, the
search for efficiency. The use of precedent is not just supported by a drive for sensible
consistency but by a drive to economize on evaluation and decision-making. Of course, it may
be that we fool ourselves by relying too much on precedent. It could be that if we thought the
issue through again, we might come up with a better solution. But we might not, and we would
have wasted all of that thinking time.
We can think of a body of recorded or remembered precedent as a vast storehouse of social
knowledgeknowledge of how we dealt with these issues in the past. It can be a powerful
argument that the treatment you propose is consistent with precedent, both in order to
maintain a rule-of-law-based society and in order to benefit from earlier analysis. Some types of
decisions will benefit from adherence to a principle of conservatism: the burden of proof is on
those who seek change. This principle is expressed in the aphorism, if it isnt broken, dont fix
it. You might say that those who seek change must show that something is indeed broken.
Moreover, it is not just the benefits of earlier analysis and conservatism that we obtain as a
result of adherence to precedent. In addition, depending on the age of the precedent, and more
importantly on how often it has been followed and how well accepted it appears to be in
general society, we might assume that the precedent has a degree of support from consensus,
or at least acquiescence. Perhaps, after the judge made the decision, opposing advocates tried
to convince other judges to reverse it, or tried to have legislators amend the underlying law or
pass a law to reverse it, and failed.
Adherence to precedent is not just about consistency or the rule of law. It is also about
information and experience. In a number of pursuits, we say that there is no substitute for
experience. Experience allows us to make nuanced decisions based on information gathered
through practice. Businesses have long recognized that this type of know-how is valuable and
should be captured, recorded, and disseminated. The common law represents a system for
doing so.
There may be circumstances in which research or other non-experience-based information may
be more useful, but there will definitely be circumstances in which experience trumps research.
In a sense, the common law system may be viewed as an inductive, as opposed to deductive,
method for determining social policy. It dates back as far as the Battle of Hastings in 1066.
So, we can envision the common law processthe process of accreting, and then according
respect to, decisional experienceas a kind of evolutionary process. It is an experimental
process in which principles may be announced and evaluated over time. The main question that
we must ask of this type of process is whether its discriminating mechanism is a good one or
not: does it recognize error and correct it?
The comparison to evolution depends on the quality of the selection mechanism. Darwinian
evolution entails the survival of the fittest. We do not really have a theory of survival of the
best ruleswe even lack consensus on what would be best. However, reasonable people
might expect the crucible of time to tend towards revising bad precedents and respecting
good ones. Judge Richard Posner famously argued in 1972 that the common laws
discriminating principle was efficiency. While this has been debated inconclusively, it is to be
hoped that judges would tend toward choosing the principles that they think are best for
society, and this choice would certainly have something to do with efficiency.
In summary, precedent is powerful because sensible consistency is good, because it relies on
earlier analysis, saving time and energy, because it is supported by the principle of
conservatism, and because it may be supported by consensus or acquiescence. These rationales
are often applicable outside the legal system as well. Thus, an argument that emphasizes the
support of precedent may be very powerful indeed.
Consistency-based reasoning is everywhere, and so these arguments are relevant in all areas of
life. In business, two employees might argue that they should get similar raises. Good human
resources practice suggests that consistency of treatment is important, so it is necessary to
determine the ratio decidendi for a differential raise. In fact, the very concept of
reasonableness of treatment requires that we have a ratio decidendia reasonfor treating
two people differently in any situation. Sensible consistency is often an indicator of fairness and
objectivity. Consider teachers grading papers or parents dealing with their children. It is good to
be, and to be seen to be, consistent.
5.3 Rationes Decidendi: The Essence of Decisions
Beginning law students in common law countries that have rules of binding precedent, like the
U.S., learn how to read judicial opinions in order to distill the ratio decidendi of these cases.
They do so in order to know what the law is, because under binding precedent, once we define
the precedent it is a rule of law.
The goal is to seek the narrowest rule of decision that will explain the outcome of the case.
What is meant by narrow in this context? The explanation must explain the decision and
nothing more. It does so in the form of an if-then statement, such as if A, B, and C, then X.
Here, you can see the room for debate. How do you know that it is not A and B, then X, or B and
C, then X? Here, the decision-maker must articulate a reason why each of A, B, and C are
necessary, and sufficient, conditions for X.
Point: We should follow the precedent set by a prior case.Counterpoint: There are
many distinctions between that case and this oneyou cannot know that the factors
that caused the decision in the prior case are all present in the current one.Countercounterpoint:
Those are indeed distinctionsbut they dont make a difference. The
salient factorsthe ones that make a differenceare the same.Counter-countercounterpoint:
How do you know which are the salient factors?
Empirically, without actually getting into the mind of the judge, we really cannot tell from a
single case which were the salient factsthe necessary conditions. The judge might tell us what
she relied on, but we just dont know for sure. So, any time an opponent argues based on a
single case as precedent, you know that he is on infirm ground.
Actually, the search for the ratio decidendi is guided by the principle of Occams razor, which
suggests that the simplest explanation of a phenomenonthe one that requires the fewest
assumptions or conditionsis likely to be the correct one. Occams razor is not a firm rule of
logic, but a guide to decision-making under uncertainty. In a legal context, looking at a particular
set of caseswe might compare cases to observations in sciencethe common threads that
are both necessary and sufficient to explain all of the observations can be understood as the
ratio decidendi.
With a series of cases, we may use Occams razor to find the ratio decidendi that parsimoniously
explains the entire series and nothing more. If we have a case in which A, B, and C are present,
but other cases in which only A and B are present and still others in which only B and C are
present, and the outcome of each case is X, then we know that B is necessary for X, but A and C
are not. It could be that one of A or C must be present, but we just do not know from this series
of cases.
To illustrate the discussion of A, B, and C, assume that we are talking about murder, and that A
is intent to kill, B is action causing death, and C is death. In modern legal systems, all three are
necessary to constitute murder, but you can imagine an alternate legal system in which intent is
unnecessary or in which actual death is unnecessary.
Furthermore, there may be circumstances in which no single ratio decidendi can explain the
series of cases. For example, if A and B, B and C, and A and C all result in X, then we do not
know whether any of them is necessary or sufficient for X. The rule could be that any of those
combinations result in X, but no other conditions result in X. Or it could be that the presence of
any one of those factors results in X.
What if in one decision, A, B, and C result in X, and in another decision, A, B, and C result in not
X? Then the one thing we know is that we have no clue as to what results in X. Perhaps there
were other unobserved facts that made the difference; we must identify them. Otherwise,
these cases are inconsistent, and something must give way.
I have been using symbolsA, B, and Cto show the logic used in determining the ratio
decidendi. This phase of legal analysisthe analysis of precedentcan be simply formulated as
follows. First, you must distill facts into variables: characterize the facts as As, Bs, and Cs.
Second, through the Occams razor type process, you must determine which conditions are
necessary and sufficient for X. There may be sets of casesdata sets if you willthat do not
allow you, or your opponent, to determine which conditions are necessary and sufficient. So be
ityou can point this out in your opponents argument and, subject to ethical constraints, elide
it in yours. As we know, the common law analysis process seeks to derive if-then statements
from various sets of facts linked with conclusions. This is not intellectual gymnastics, but it can
be an intellectual marathon: grinding analytical persistence is often rewarded with victory.
Lets concretize the use of ratio decidendi further. Securities statutes are intended to protect
investors in stocks and bonds from fraud, and do so by expanding the definition of fraud
beyond its traditional common law-based bounds. Securities laws were intended to make it
easier to claim fraud in connection with sales of securities. In common law systems, statutes can
be definitively interpreted through case law, which can constitute binding precedent.
The elements of the crime of securities fraud under U.S. law are understood today to include (1)
a material misrepresentation or omission of fact, (2) fraudulent intent (scienter), (3) a
connection with the purchase or sale of a security, (4) reliance by the plaintiff on the facts
presented, (5) economic loss, and (6) causation of the loss by the reliance. We will focus on item
(4).
It has been observed that item (4) (reliance) might be difficult for plaintiffs who purchase stocks
or bonds in the securities markets to prove. Many people fail to read the prospectus or other
materials distributed, or they fail to create evidence that they actually relied on particular
statements in the materials that turn out to be false.
In response, the regulators and courts developed the so-called fraud on the market theory,
which was adopted by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Basic v. Levinson. This
approach allows plaintiffs the benefit of a presumption that they relied upon allegedly
fraudulent information, even where they were actually unaware of the fraudulent conduct at
the time of the relevant transaction. In effect, the ratio decidendi of Basic v. Levinson was that
although item (4) would still be required, it would be readily satisfied without any evidence of
actual reliance. If you have the other five elements, and the defendant cannot find a way to
rebut the presumption of reliance, you win your case.
The ratio decidendi is important in common law systems because of the rule of stare decisis, or
binding precedent: judges are generally required to follow earlier decisions (except when they
dontmore about this below). What does it mean to follow earlier decisions? Since each
decision deals with a new factual setting, what must be followed is the ratio decidendi.
Remember that the common law system prizes consistency.
The ratio decidendi concept is the way that we define consistency where each case has
distinctions: it is a way of determining whether the distinctions are salient. Another way of
saying this is that it is a way of determining whether the distinctions make a difference.
Much of legal argument is consumed with determining which rule should determine the
treatment of a particular circumstance. In a common law system with diverse judges operating
in a decentralized environment, addressing different types of fact situations, there are bound to
be lots of different rationes decidendi. In an argument, it is up to each lawyer to select the ones
that help him win, and argue for their application.
Indeed, I fear that this discussion might give you a false sense of the precision and scientific
nature of the identification and application of precedent. Rather, there is great contention over
what the precedents tell us. If you read just about any non-unanimous U.S. Supreme Court
decision, you will see that very skilled justices, applying these techniques at the highest levels,
are able to use precedent to justify sharply differing conclusions. Few would argue that the U.S.
legal system is totally indeterminate and malleable, but there is significant flex in the system.
However, you can use the techniques presented in this chapter to see which judges hew more
closely to precedent and which ones seem to be acting more, shall we say, creatively.
A good portion of the first year of a U.S. law school education is spent illustrating in excruciating
detail how earlier precedents can be distinguished from the current case: how to argue that
the adverse precedents are inapplicable and how the benevolent precedents dominate the
treatment of the current case. This process is no more than reasoning by analogy and arguing
about bases for similarity. Indeed, it has much in common with the technique of framing:
advocates argue about which precedent is most analogous to the case at hand. The similarity of
the current case to the prior case depends on the ratio decidendi of the prior case and the
extent to which that ratio decidendi is invoked in the current case.
Point: The present case is governed by the precedent encapsulated in the ratio
decidendi of a long line of cases.Counterpoint: No, the present case is distinguished
from that line of cases by salient facts and is governed instead by the ratio decidendi
of a different line of cases.
5.4 Obiter Dictum and Cheap Talk
A principle of conservatism suggests that you should not establish general principles until you
need to. When a court decides something it does not yet need to, or articulates an opinion that
is not logically necessary to its disposition of the case, it is seen to be exceeding its mandate to
decide cases as it becomes necessary to do so. To enunciate a general rule that is not necessary
to decide the case at hand and to reconcile the decision with prior cases, violates this principle.
When it does, it is referred to in Latin as an obiter dictum, an incidental remark.
The idea of obiter dictum is a requirement for judges to walk the walk, not just talk the talk,
when they engage in precedent-based judicial legislation. While judges often feel the need to
be eloquent, and to speak of high principles, it is the job of the case law analyst to ignore all
that and try to focus on the facts and the resulting ratio decidendi.
In these situations, even though the judges statements may be wise and compelling, lawyers
tend to discount them in the common law process. They reject statements that may have been
made by the earlier court, but that were not of the essence in the earlier courts action. For
them, this type of statement is mere cheap talk. Because the statement was not combined
with action, the earlier court did not bear the full political and professional consequences of its
statement. And so, the logic goes, its statement cannot be of the essence or part of the ratio
decidendi.
More importantly, obiter dictum is not part of the ratio decidendi, so consistency of treatment
does not require respect for this earlier statementit is not part of the treatment. In fact,
identifying obiter dictum is simply the converse of identifying the ratio decidendi: anything the
decision-maker said that is not part of the ratio decidendi is obiter dictum.
Outside of the courtroom, thinking like a lawyer, this type of argument is suggestive that we
must be careful about arguments from consistency. Are we interested in consistency of action
or consistency of thought? So, you might respond to the argument that is what we said last
time this arose with but that is not what we did last time or, but what we said in that
connection last time was irrelevant to what we did.
Point: The present case is governed by the precedent encapsulated in the ratio
decidendi of a long line of cases.Counterpoint: The alleged ratio decidendi that you
propose was mere obiter dictumit was not necessary to the decision of that case
and so should not guide us now.
5.5 Exceptions that Swallow the Rule
Some social arrangements change quickly and some change slowly. For example, a law can be
repealed, effective immediately, or it can be subjected to increasing exceptions that eventually,
in retrospect, can be seen to have gutted the rule. Think of the U.S. Glass-Steagall Act enacted
in 1933, which separated commercial banking from investment banking and other non-banking
activities. It never was repealed, but over the years, it was eviscerated by a series of
amendments culminating in the 1999 Graham-Leach-Bliley Act.
The same thing can be done, with less formality, with precedents. As new cases come up, with
new characteristics, we can distinguish those cases until the cases that are excepted from the
prior rule become a majority of what originally was thought covered. This is not necessarily a
bad thing but rather a way in which rules can evolve organically to meet changing
circumstances. They can evolve based on experience.
When a rule has enough exceptions, can we still call it a rule? In fact, at some point, one might
say that this rule no longer has the coverage and integrity it once had, and that it is time to say a
few kind words and inter the thing. It is said that the exceptions have devoured the rule. This
can be an effective argument when someone seeks to apply a rule to you, and it has no obvious
exception that covers your case. In a strong sense, it is an argument from consistency. If the rule
has been abrogated for most cases, is it fair to apply it to the remaining subjects?
Point: You have broken the rule.Counterpoint: That rule is so tattered with
exceptions that it no longer makes sense to apply it at all.Counter-counterpoint: The
fact that there are exceptions shows that we are still serious about applying the rule
(this is a case in which the exception may indeed prove the rule).
5.6 Breaking Precedent
At some point, a lawyer will find it difficult to distinguish cases or to argue for an exception from
precedent. In these situations, the argument from conservatismfrom precedentmay be
countered by an argument from innovation. No one would gainsay that these cases present new
circumstances; all circumstances are new and have unique characteristics. The past never
repeats itself precisely. You might even claim that these are new times, giving rise to a need to
rethink and to craft new solutions. Stockbrokers periodically make these claims: we do not have
to worry about long-standing principles of valuation or about precedents for market reversal
because this is a new economy or a new paradigm. This is the moment when you should
grab your wallet.
There are a few notable cases of reversal of precedent in U.S. legal history. The greatest one was
the 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education, where the U.S. Supreme Court said, despite
earlier decisions holding that sending black and white children to separate schools could
constitute equal treatment, it now saw that in this context, separation is starkly inconsistent
with equality.
Point: All our precedents suggest that the law is against you, and there are no
available bases for distinguishing the present case.Counterpoint: It is time to change
the rule; there is no reason to adhere to consistency with a foolish rule.
5.7 Passive Virtues and Passive Aggression: Not to Decide Is to Decide
Passive virtues is a term coined by the great U.S. constitutional law scholar Alexander Bickel in
1961 to refer, approvingly, to sneaky procedural tricks used by judges to avoid deciding cases.
We addressed some of these, like ripeness doctrine, when we discussed procedure in Chapter 3.
Why do I call them sneaky? Bickels idea is that these approaches are somewhat discretionary,
to be used not necessarily because of their ostensible rationale, or consistently, but in order to
achieve the goal of passivity when passivity is indicated by other circumstances. The passive
virtues include arguments that the matter is not yet ripe for adjudication, that it is moot or
that there is not a real case or controversy, that the matter is not amenable to review, that the
plaintiff lacks standing, or that the court lacks jurisdiction. The parental analog is the parents
incredibly frustrating well see response to a childs request.
Why would judges want to avoid deciding cases? Perhaps they do so because in some cases
society does better by muddling through without establishing a clear rule. Perhaps they do so
because if they decided, it would come out the wrong way from a public policy perspective.
Perhaps they do so because they wish implicitly to refer the matter to a legislature, which can
decide the issue with greater analytical resources and greater political legitimacy. Passivity is
aligned with conservatism: avoid deciding a case where the facts of the case may require the
development of a new rule.
Outside the law, we might say, again, if it isnt broken, dont fix it. This aphorism, if it has any
meaning beyond the tautological, suggests that existing circumstances may be superior to
alternatives for reasons that we are unable to observe without extensive analysis. It is a
principle of conservatism based on information economizing. We might even extend the
aphorism with another: be careful to avoid the cure that is worse than the disease. Not every
problem is worth solving, at least not yet. So, there are circumstances in life when it is best not
to decide. Your 10-year-old might ask for a cell phone, and you might respond, Ill think about
it. Or you might say, Lets wait and see at your next birthday, or Lets wait and see when my
cell phone contract is up for renewal.
We dont really know whether avoiding a decision is a passive virtue or is instead passive
aggression. This is captured in yet another common aphorism: not to decide is to decide. If
the judges use passive virtues to avoid deciding a case, someone loses who would have won if
the judges had complied more fully with their responsibilities. In life, outside the law, refusal to
decide when people have rights that are being denied amounts to continued denial.
5.8 Specificity and Delegation
Legislators and makers of contracts have many choices. Their laws and contracts will no doubt
be incomplete, but the degree of incompleteness is a choice. Similar choices exist outside the
legal system. For example, people who make rules for sports or other non-legal pursuits also
have many choices. One type of choice is the level of specificity of the rules. The game of
Ultimate (aka Frisbee) is governed by 10 brief rules, fitting on a single page, while professional
basketball has 65 pages of rules.
By providing a high degree of specificity in the original rule, the legislator provides great
predictability to the governed persons and less discretion to judges, referees, or other thirdparty
decision-makers. When legislators create laws with less specificity, they may be uncertain
how best to structure more specific rules, or it may be too costly in time and resources, or in
political capital, to do so. However, after a period during which it can observe experience
applying less specific laws, a legislator may decide to adopt the common law or to modify the
common law in a more specific set of revised rules. The development of the common law
process itself can be understood as a mechanism for providing greater specificity over time:
with each new precedent we know more about how the rule works.
The choice between less or more specificity provides some practical challenges and
opportunities for any rule-maker. The rule-maker need not provide a complete set of rules right
away: it can begin with a set of principles or a set of basic rules. Then it can decide later, based
on experience, what the next step should be. This way of thinking about specificity also reminds
us that the judges discretion is not unconstrained if the legislature can change the rules after
seeing what the judge has done. In this way and to this extent, the judge is a supervised agent
of the legislature. In this way, also, we can see it is inappropriate to criticize judges for judicial
legislation when their function in this context is to fill in the gaps in general rules provided by
the legislator.
Point: The judge has gone beyond the specific language of the statute, engaging in
excessive and undemocratic judicial legislation. Alternatively, the referee has gone
beyond the specific rules of the game.Counterpoint: The judge or the referee is
charged with making decisions. Where the law or the rules of the game are set in
general terms, we can infer that the legislator or rule-maker implicitly delegated to
the judge or referee discretion to fill in the details.
5.9 Citations, Footnotes, and the Pedigree of Information
In the context of arguments based on precedent, the footnotes contained in a written argument
display the precedent and telegraph the quality of support for the authors position. Footnotes
are the put up or shut up response to the critical epistemological question in any argument:
how do you know?
Footnotes serve the role in argument that reproducibility serves in science: they allow others to
see for themselves the basis for the authors statements. They also provide a research log or
trail, disclosing to decision-makers and opponents the basis for the authors positions, and
allowing the opponents to assess and seek to undermine that basis. Therefore, it is a strategic
decision how much of the basis for your argument to disclose in the footnotes. The strategy
depends on how important it is to make your initial affirmative case versus how important it is
to make your opponents rebuttal more difficult.
Lawyers have a love-hate relationship with footnotes. We fear that our reliance on footnotes
shows up the lack of poetry in our souls. We fear that our reliance on footnotes means that we
lack our own voices or bases for our statements: everything has to come from somewhere else.
And yet, there is something beautifully liberal, even selfless, about this requirement to support
every assertion in our reasoned argument. The underlying principle seems to be that none of us
is entitled, in the liberal world of law, to impose his evaluation on others. Instead, we must lead
the other, by mustering and displaying information, by anchoring our arguments in precedents,
laws, and facts, ineluctably but voluntarily, to come to the same conclusion. Once we
understand the proper role of citations in displaying the basis for statements, it is difficult to
criticize the modesty, and honesty, that footnotes evince.
Citations allow the reader to see, and to evaluate for himself, the quality of the support for the
authors statements. The reader can see the pedigree of the information on which the author
relies. It is possible for an author to build a great superstructure of argument on a slender base
of authority. So, the reader must consider the support for the authors statements and may
need to reverse engineer the authors logic a bit. The quality of support for a proposition will
often be in the eye of the beholder. In addition, the reader needs to make sure that the
integrated entirety of the supported points makes sense; this is the analysis and synthesis
method of legal argument discussed earlier.
Point: Here is my argument, and each component is fully supported by the
authorities cited in the footnotes.Counterpoint: You win. I got nothing.Alternative
Counterpoint
i. I shall examine each footnote and determine the degree of support supplied by
the authorities cited. Well see. (Note that each footnote might be the loose thread
that, if pulled, can destroy the entire argument.)
ii. While each of your points is adequately supported, they do not together make a
complete argument.
6
Arguing About Facts
Facts are facts, and lawyers have no special power over facts. But the appreciation of facts and
the salience of facts in deciding a matter are the province of lawyers. Maybe that is why some
lawyers become skilled investigators. Recall that in deriving the ratio decidendi of a prior case,
and in determining the characteristics of a current case, it is necessary to taxonomize the facts:
to place messy facts into discrete and meaningful categories.
Law professors sometimes make the following challenge to their students: You let me control
the facts, Ill let you control the law, and I will always win. The point is that every claim about
the application of rules is dependent on the facts that support either compliance with or
violation of the rules. Remember that each rule is an if-then statement: if certain elements
are satisfied, then certain legal consequences ensue. The professor is saying that if she controls
whether the if is ever satisfied, she controls whether or not the law applies.
As we discussed earlier, every legal claim is composed of a number of elements. Each of these
elements is essentially dependent upon the appreciation of the facts in the case. In fact, this is
the core of legal analysis: determine the elements of the claim, and then examine each element
separately to determine whether each is satisfied. So, if the elements of the crime of murder
are death, causation, and intentionality, we have three factual questions. If there is a defense
available based on an argument that the defendant acted in self-defense, or lacked the
intellectual capacity to appreciate or intend the crime, we have additional factual questions.
Each of these questions may present a high level of complexity.
6.1 Determining the Salience of Facts
We do not know which rules apply until we know the facts. We do not know which facts are
important until we know which rules apply. Breathe deeply; yes, it is circular. But that does not
mean it is impossible. The art of reasoned persuasion is an iterative, recursive heuristic,
meaning that we must go back and forth between the facts and the rules until we have a good
fit. We cannot see the facts properly until we know what framework to place them into, and we
cannot determine what framework to place them into until we see the basic contours of the
facts. The great economist Friedrich Hayek said, Without a theory, the facts are silent.
In the end, the critical arguments will be about whether a rule has been broken. Therefore, the
final question will be whether the factual requirements to find that the relevant rule has been
broken have been met. Where your formal argument is weakwhere the formal analysis of the
facts does not support your claimit may be attractive to emphasize other facts that are
informally appealing but not part of the formal claim. When your opponent emphasizes certain
facts, you must determine whether those facts are part of the analysis or, alternatively, whether
your opponent is blowing smoke or setting up a diversion.
Think about a claim by a multinational corporation (MC) against a low net worth individual
(LNWI). Perhaps the MC claims that the LNWI damaged the MCs property and must now
compensate the MC. The LNWIs lawyer may emphasize the disparity of power and resources. If
you represent the MC, it is up to you to point out that the elements of a claim for property
damage do not include the relative power or financial wherewithal of the parties. The LNWIs
lawyer is seeking to reframe the case as one about distribution of power or wealth.
Point: Facts X, Y, and Z are the basis of my claim against you.Counterpoint: In this
type of case, X and Y are relevant, but Z is not. And without W, they are insufficient to
complete a claim against me.
6.2 Evidence and Missing Links
Think of an apparently simple case of murder. We have video that shows the defendant pulling
the trigger on a firearm aimed at the victim and the victim is mortally wounded. We have a
corroborating eyewitness account. What must we know in order to determine that the
defendant is guilty? First, can we rely on the video or eyewitness account? We know that video
can be doctored, and individuals can lie or make mistakes. Outside of a courtroom, especially
where the stakes may not be very high, we might tend to make assumptions that video is
authentic and that the eyewitness account is true and correct. But there may be circumstances
where it is useful to challenge these types of evidence. Second, did the victim die due to the
wound? Did death ensue from the act of the defendant?
It is the advocates job to examine carefully the factual components of his opponents claim and
to seek to cast doubt on how the facts are assembled to establish the opponents claim. What
are the missing links between the different facts? Where is there doubt about the facts or about
the reliability of the evidence for the facts?
The evidence may become unreliable if your opponent cannot establish t hat it was gathered
properly or preserved properly. Was it legal to video tape these events? We have a video of the
defendant pulling the trigger, but how do we know the gun was loaded or the videotape was
produced at the time the victim was shot? Are we sure there was not another shooter? How do
we know the videotape was not subject to tampering later?
The evidence may be circumstantial, meaning in this context that while the evidence is
consistent with your opponents argument, other possible facts that do not indicate the
defendants responsibility are also consistent with your opponents argument. Circumstantial
evidence is good evidence, but it is not by itself conclusive evidence.
One of the essential functions of lawyers is to identify gaps like these in opponents narratives
and to highlight them. It takes a careful, imaginative, and suspicious turn of mind to do it well.
6.3 Causation of Harm and Negligence
Some causal links are easy to establish. If I pull the trigger and the gun fires, and the bullet from
my gun hits you, and you die of blood loss from the wound caused by that bullet, no one would
argue with the assertion that Ive killed you. Other causal links are tougher to establish. One of
the central areas in which law is different from ordinary experience is in its analysis of
causation. In fact, law has critiqued and subverted common understandings and assumptions
about causation.
The legal perspective on causation is easiest to see in relatively simple cases of tort or crime. A
child runs after a ball into the street without looking and is struck by a car. Horrible. What
caused the injury to the child? Who is responsible? Is it the child himself, the childs parents, the
driver of the car, the thrower of the ball, the manufacturer of the car, or the designer of the
street, or shall we blame this tragedy on the act of a cruel deity, leaving the childs parents with
no recourse? You can readily see the circumstances under which any of these might be thought
responsible, but we normally assign primary blame to the driver of the car.
If you focus on the child running into the street, it is easy to see that causation is in a sense
reciprocal: if the child had not run into the street, there would be no harm; if the driver had
stopped, there would be no harm. If the parent had monitored the child more carefully, there
would be no harm. You can also see that, at some level, the causation of the harm is more a
matter of social relations or public policy than a matter of scientific testing of cause and effect.
One type of question about causation is whether a personin order to be found responsible
must be the sole cause, a sufficient cause when there are other contributing causal factors, a
necessary cause, or a contributing but not sufficient cause. Sole causation means that the
causal factor must be sufficient by itself to cause the relevant effect, and no other causal factors
contributed. Sufficient causation means that even if other causal factors contributed, the causal
factor in question was sufficient by itself to cause the effect. Necessary cause is sometimes
referred to as but-for causation, meaning that but for the causal factor, the result would not
have ensued.
Different legal rules or social situations set different standards of responsibility. But outside the
legal context, there is much room for debate on what constitutes a sufficient level of
causationin relative and absolute termsto give rise to responsibility.
Point: You caused harm to me.Counterpoint:
i. My actions were only one factorwithout the other factors, you would have
experienced no harm.
ii. My actions may have contributed to the harm, but the other factors were
sufficient by themselves to cause you harm.
Even science involves a good deal of social or political choice. One need only refer to early
arguments about the existence or cause of global warming to bring to mind some of the
difficulties. For a long time, cigarette companies were able to suppress scientific knowledge
about the causal relationship between smoking and several diseases. The question of whether
the residue of bovine growth hormones in meat causes cancer or other disease has bounced
around quite a bit between the European Union and the United States. All these examples
illustrate the plasticity, or at least the contestability, of science. This contestability is often
reduced over time, as evidence and consensus grows. Does anyone doubt today that smoking
cigarettes causes cancer?
6.4 Brandeis Briefs and Scientific Experts
More than a century ago, a young lawyer from Boston was confronted with the task of
convincing the U.S. Supreme Court that when the U.S. Constitution guarantees all citizens equal
protection under the law, equal does not actually mean equal (so much for plain meanings). The
lawyer needed to convince the court that when the citizens are female, the protection must be
greater than for males, at least when it comes to working in a laundry. Indeed, the argument
was that equal protection means unequal treatment. In order to win his case, the lawyer
needed to convince the Court that an Oregon law prohibiting women from working in any
mechanical establishment, or factory, or laundry more than ten hours during any one day did
not violate the rights of women.
What was the young lawyer to do? If he simply argued to the Court that, in his experience,
women were delicate flowers requiring nurture and sunlightrather than drudgerythen,
although he might well have received wise nods of agreement from the nine elderly male
justices he sought to convince, he risked the justices concluding that their wives and daughters
might find such chauvinism offensive, and to avoid unpleasantness at home, the justices might
be inclined to decide the case against his client. No, he needed to provide the justices with
something other than personally-held beliefs on which the justices could hang their bowler hats
when they returned to hearth and home.
The lawyer, Louis Brandeis, who eight years later would himself become a member of the
Supreme Court, assembled all of the extant social science research on the detrimental impact of
long work hours on the health of women.15 As a result of this evidence, the Supreme Court
upheld the Oregon law. This was one of the first instances where an advocate emphasized the
law-in-action over the formalistic pronouncements of the law-in-the-books. The term Brandeis
brief has come to refer to any use of policy-oriented extra-legal arguments in briefs.
Because statistical evidence is generally circumstantial evidenceit goes to correlation, rather
than causationit must be used carefully. But there are many areas, and they are increasing, in
which the way we know things is through complex statistical analysis.
I was once a member of a university committee charged with evaluating whether a university
researcher had engaged in scientific misconduct. The researcher had been required to make
certain very precise measurements. The charge was that the researcher had fabricated some of
the measurements. We had no way to go back and check the measurements: how could we
know whether the numbers were real or fake?
The committee decided to check with a statistician. The statistician looked at the pattern of the
final (smallest) digits of the measurements and compared the existing pattern with the
expected random pattern. The result: there was an infinitesimally small chance that the existing
pattern was randomthat it occurred naturally. The pattern was damning evidence of a very
high likelihood that the numbers were fabricated. The numbers were unlikely to have occurred
naturally, and there was no other plausible explanation of the non-random results. Therefore, it
was clear the standard of proof we were charged with applyingwhether the preponderance of
the evidence indicated scientific misconductwas met. The chances of any cause other than
fabrication were so small, that this evidence might have also satisfied a criminal standard of
proof: proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
Statistical evidence can be good circumstantial evidence, and circumstantial evidence can be
very persuasive. Its persuasiveness depends on the likelihood of other causes being responsible
for the phenomenon at issue.
Point: I have statistical evidence that use of your product is strongly correlated with
harm, and we have tested and ruled out all conceivable alternative
causes.Counterpoint: That is only circumstantial evidence and cannot be accepted as
proof of responsibility.Counter-counterpoint: Circumstantial evidence is indeed not
necessarily conclusive, but strong correlation, combined with careful evaluation and
rejection of alternative causes, is highly suggestive.
Lawyers, and everyone else who wants to be able to make, evaluate, and oppose arguments
about causal relationships, need to be conversant with statistical methods. These methods
allow us to estimate the magnitude of correlations and even to estimate the relative causal
impact of multiple causal factors. Where data can be obtained regarding large numbers of
events, these methods can provide great insight into causal relationships. They can provide
great insight both for application of law and for law reform.
6.5 Quality of Evidence: The Best Evidence Rule
Historians speak of primary sources and secondary sources, and they prefer primary sources
consisting of physical evidence, photographs, other recordings, or first-hand accounts by current
observers. Common law systems have long had a rule that secondary sources would not be
accepted as evidence where primary sources are readily available. It is easy to see that any case
or argument is made more persuasive if it is based on higher quality evidence, so, in a sense,
this rule of evidence should be understood also as a rule of argument: always use the most
persuasive evidence available, which will ordinarily be that provided by primary sources. If I am
trying to prove that I own a parcel of real estate, the deed itself, perhaps combined with a check
of the land registry, is the best evidence rather than my testimony or that of a neighbor or an
observer.
Similarly, when your opponent attempts to support a proposition using secondary sources or
other less reliable forms of evidence, this may be an indication that there is a weakness in his
argument. Presumably, unless he is lazy, he would have provided the primary source were it
available. So, as we have learned, we must evaluate the quality of support for each component
of our opponents argument. These components include not only the propositions of law but
also the quality of evidence regarding factual matters. It is only through this grinding analysis
that we can identify the loose threads. Once we see them, we can pull on them until the entire
argument unravels.
6.6 Exclusion of Evidence
We noted in Chapter 1 that the legal system itself sets the rules about what kinds of arguments
will be successful within that system. In fact, the legal system does more than that; it also limits
the evidence that may be used to craft a persuasive argumentthe parameters for the kind of
knowledge it will take into account. Why would a decision-maker ever determine not to
consider certain information? Is that not the definition of ignoranceto ignore knowledge?
Certain types of evidence may be excluded because they are known to be unreliable or easy to
fabricate. Other types of evidence may be excluded in order to deter the gathering of that
evidence: in the U.S., evidence obtained by illegal search is generally excluded from use in
criminal trials.
As parents, as executives, and as citizens, it is not uncommon to receive information that was
improperly obtained. One employee might hack anothers email account and anonymously
provide evidence of impropriety. A classified document might be illegally divulged to Wikileaks.
The recipient is often in a quandary about what to do with this information. For the same
reason that illegally obtained evidence is excluded in criminal prosecutions, you might decide to
ignore this type of evidence in non-legal disputes. On the other hand, evidence is evidence,
legal rights are legal rights, and a crime is a crime. In situations that involve wrongly acquired
evidence, we see another conflict between a specific type of procedural justiceavoiding the
use of improperly obtained informationand substantive justice.
Point: The evidence proves my case.Counterpoint: The key piece of evidence is
inadmissible and so cannot be considered as part of your case.
6.7 Estoppel: Blocking Argument
Estoppel literally means to bottle-up or prevent, and it prevents parties from arguing or
asserting certain facts. Often, estoppel is related to the idea of reliance. If the counter-party
relied on the first partys statement of facts or acquiescence in a particular situation, the first
party is estopped from asserting otherwise. The first party is blocked from claiming facts
inconsistent with its earlier explicit or implicit statement.
You might wonder why any argument or assertion would be foreclosed? Isnt this another form
of ignorance? The main idea here seems to be reliance and repose: once you have had a chance
to make a statement or to correct a misunderstanding, you are thereafter estopped from doing
so.
One important example of estoppel is in the law of letters of credit. Letters of credit are
important mechanisms for making payment and for financing. Once the beneficiary of a letter
of credit demands payment, if the bank that issued the letter of credit accepts the demand or
waits more than the specified number of days, the bank may be estopped from claiming that
the beneficiary did not properly satisfy all the conditions for payment.
The rule of estoppel in this context has two purposes. First, estoppel allows the beneficiary to
rely on the banks acceptance of the demand for payment or on the specified passage of time,
which might be construed as acquiescence. Second, it discourages banks from trying to find
problems in the beneficiarys demand for payment should the bank communicate with its
customer (on whose behalf it issued the letter of credit) and learn that the customer was
dissatisfied with the beneficiarys goods and preferred not to pay for those goods.
You can no doubt think of many interpersonal circumstances where you are informally estopped
in the sense that you can no longer assert a fact or an argument. In fact, you may think of
circumstances in which you have sought to get someones sign-off or buy-in early so that
they would be blocked from complaining later. This process is used in connection with
negotiation of contracts or other legal documents. A business agreement or treaty will be
circulated for comments. If you fail to make your comment at the appropriate time, you will at
least be criticized for raising an issue after everyone (rightfully) assumed it was settled. This is a
procedural criticism: your comment is no longer timely.
Point: I have fundamental concerns about our project.Counterpoint: The process
that we have been following allowed opportunities to make this point and you did
not do so in the allotted time. It is too late.
6.8 Presumptions: Shifting the Burden of Proof
Presumptions serve a number of different, and substantive, functions. First, a presumption
against the person likely to have control of the evidence can force that person to produce the
evidence. After all, if the presumption is against you, and you have evidence that can rebut the
presumption, you have incentives to present it. Second, under uncertainty, a presumption may
allocate responsibility where it is most likely to lie. It may be useful to make a presumption if,
after investigation, it is better than flipping a coin between two otherwise equally plausible
inferences.
Abraham Lincoln, a great lawyer as well as a great President, was fond of asking, If you call a
tail a leg, how many legs does a dog have? When his victim would innocently answer five, he
would reply that the victim had it wrong: Calling a tail a leg does not make it a leg. Making a
presumption does not make the fact presumed so.
In Charles Dickens Oliver Twist, Mr. Brownlow convincingly accuses Mrs. Bumble of theft, and Mr. Bumble hopes to
keep his job but is confronted with a presumption. The dialog is as follows:It was all Mrs. Bumble. She would do it,
urged Mr. Bumble; first looking round to ascertain that his partner had left the room.That is no excuse, replied Mr.
Brownlow. You were present on the occasion of the destruction of these trinkets, and indeed are the more guilty of
the two, in the eye of the law; for the law supposes that your wife acts under your direction.If the law supposes
that, said Mr. Bumble, squeezing his hat emphatically in both hands, the law is a assa idiot. If thats the eye of
the law, the law is a bachelor; and the worst I wish the law is, that his eye may be opened by experienceby
experience.
The Oliver Twist story is an excellent example of a presumption used as a device for allocating
responsibility. The law presumed that a wife acts under a husbands direction in order to
allocate responsibility to husbands to supervise their wives. But it is not strict liability in the
sense that husbands are not liable for the acts of their wives no matter what. Rather, the
husbands are presumed responsible and must bear the burden of proving that they are not in
fact responsible. The presumption shifts the burden of proof from a complainant to show that
the husband is actually responsible for his wifes acts, to the husband to show that he is actually
not responsible. This presumption may have made sense under circumstances where husbands
controlled the family wealth, and wives were effectively judgment-proof because they held
no assets of their own. In this sense, Bumbles objection that the law is an ass is beside the
point: it is not important whether the presumption comports with reality or not. Indeed, it need
not even be a good approximation of reality; the idea of the presumption is to shift the burden
of proof.
Point: The law, or society, makes a presumption regarding facts, and based on that
presumption, you are assigned responsibility.Counterpoint: That presumption is not
based in reality: there are many circumstances in which it cannot be expected to be
true.Counter-counterpoint: Presumptions need not be based in reality, but may still
be appropriate in order to transfer the burden of proof.
7
Rhetorical Tricks
Rhetorical tricks use language in ways that can further an argument but can also be seen as
dishonest, or at least disingenuous. I relate them not to prepare you to use them, but to
prepare you to counter themconsider this chapter in the vein of defense against the dark
arts. You will no doubt avoid using sophistry to make the weaker argument appear the
stronger, but your opponent may not be so principled.
These rhetorical tricks are seen both inside and outside a legal setting. Most rhetorical tricks
prey on sloppy thinking or passive acceptance. Therefore, critical thinking and tough
questioning (is that really so? how do you know?) can reveal and contradict any of these tricks.
By learning the structure of these tricks, you will be able to identify and rebut them.
Formal logic, scientific method, and statistical analysis are all formidable defenses against these
rhetorical tricks. Moreover, once you reveal the weak logic in one of an opponents arguments,
you can capitalize on it to cast doubt on her other arguments. (This strategy itself relies on an
error of compositionincorrect inference from a part to the wholebut it can be persuasive.)
7.1 Non Sequitur: That Doesnt Follow . . .
Non sequiturs may be observed in arguments about facts and in arguments about law. Non
sequitur is a term for a whole class of circumstances where the asserted predicate does not
indicate the desired conclusion, but the speaker acts as though it does. Therefore, several of the
other rhetorical tricks identified in this chapter can also be understood as non sequiturs.
One example of a non sequitur is where an advocate argues that because something is covered
in a contract, all similar items are covered. So, if a lease contract prohibits the lessee from
keeping dogs and cats on the leasehold premises, it does not follow that snakes are also
forbidden. (I see your non sequitur and raise you an expressio unius.)
You may use a non sequitur to persuade an audience despite the logical fallacy of the non
sequitur and, indeed, because the non sequitur may mask the logical fallacy. For example, in the
famous murder trial of the former football star O.J. Simpson, a glove was found at the crime
scene. Its match was found at Simpsons estate. The gloves contained DNA evidence from
Simpson and the victims. The glove from the crime scene had been soaked in blood, and police
had frozen and unfrozen it several times. The prosecutor, goaded by Simpsons lawyer, Johnnie
Cochran, asked Simpson to try on the glove from the crime scene in court, and it seemed too
tight for Simpson. In his closing remarks, Cochran repeated, If it doesnt fit, you must acquit.
There was lots of alternative evidence of guilt, and there were possible extraneous reasons why
Simpson had trouble putting the glove on in court. For one, Simpson tried it on over rubber
gloves. Nevertheless, Cochran was able to focus the jurys attention on whether the glove fit, as
opposed to whether there was proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Non sequiturs are a
way of focusing attention away from the salient facts and on a fact that may be true but is not
salient.
Point: The elements of this crime are A, B, and C. Each element has been proven
beyond a reasonable doubt. You must convict.Counterpoint: The prosecution has
failed to prove D.Counter-counterpoint: D is not salient to this case: it need not be
proven in order to constitute the crime of which the defendant stands accused.
7.2 Ad Hominem Arguments: Discrediting the Source
No matter what criticism we level at the source of information, we cannot necessarily infer from
this criticism that the information provided is false. Even a broken clock tells the correct time
twice a day. Ad hominem attacks are those that seek to discredit the source of information,
without addressing whether the information is reliable or not.
On the other hand, it is not an inappropriate ad hominem attack if we show that the speaker is
dishonest, depending on the nexus between the evidence of dishonesty and the matter at
hand. There are few among us who have always avoided dishonesty. Perhaps you have been a
dinner guest and have falsely complimented the hosts cooking, or the behavior of the hosts
children, or the beauty of the hosts interior decorating. The fact that we have been dishonest
at times does not necessarily do much to impugn our current statements.
Thus, an ad hominem attack is a type of non sequituran irrelevancy with the focus on the
speakers credentials. An inappropriate ad hominem attack occurs when the nature of the
criticism of the speaker has nothing to do with the truth of the information provided by the
speaker. For example, if the speaker is a visual witness to a murder that took place some
distance away, it is generally appropriate, if true, to claim that the speaker is nearsighted and
was not wearing corrective lenses at the time. But it is an inappropriate ad hominem attack to
point out that the speaker is a pacifist or a politician.
In legal proceedings regarding complex matters, expert witnesses are often useful. It is
appropriate to impeach an expert witness on the basis not only of the quality of the witnesss
expertise and preparation but also on the basis of apparent bias. For example, if the expert
witness has appeared many times in similar matters, always on the same side, opposing counsel
may point out that this expert witness appears to have a bias and may even have been hired in
consideration of the bias.
Of course, there is an opposite kind of stratagem: hiding ones true biases in order to appear
neutral and influence the opinion of others. One type of stratagem along these lines is
sometimes known as an AstroTurf strategy, because it is a synthetic grass roots campaign
where the interest group seeks to appear to have broad public support, but in actuality it is
funded and otherwise supported by a particular business or political sponsor.
Point: My expert opinion is that the defendant took inadequate care to prevent the
injuries that the plaintiff sustained.Counterpoint: You are a socialist.Countercounterpoint:
My political perspective, religion, nationality, or sexual orientation are
all irrelevant to my expert opinion, which is based on the application of a special
methodology and years of experience.
7.3 Fallacies of Causation: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc, Affirming the Consequent,
Correlation Versus Causation, and Omitted Variable Bias
Scientists and social scientists are the experts in determining the links between cause and
effect. One fallacy that they seek vigorously to avoid is the confusion of correlation with
causation. Cum hoc ergo propter hoc is when two things occur together and one is assumed to
cause the other. Post hoc ergo propter hoc is when the alleged cause precedes the alleged
effect. This type of confusion can be illustrated with an old joke. A man walking down Broadway
in Manhattan comes across an old friend who is stamping his feet and shouting, No peanut
butter! The first man asks what is going on. The second explains, This keeps away the
elephants. The first responds, There are no elephants in Manhattan. The second responds,
See, it works! Clearly, the fact that there is correlation between stamping and shouting, on
the one hand, and the absence of elephants, on the other, does not prove causation.
One variety of post hoc ergo propter hoc is known as the fallacy of affirming the consequent.
An if-then statement has an antecedent (if) and a consequent (then). If the if-then statement
is true, every time there is an antecedent, there will be a consequent. But it will not necessarily
be true that every time there is a consequent there is also an antecedentother causes might
result in the consequent.
Affirming the Consequent:i. If she is a lawyer, then she is expert in the law.ii. She is expert in the
law.iii. Therefore, she is a lawyer.You can readily see that expertise in law does not necessarily constitute someone
a lawyer. Many politicians, journalists, judges, and scholars become experts in the law without becoming lawyers.
The category of evidence that lawyers label circumstantial suffers from the same type of
problem: it fails to provide a basis for inferring causation from correlation. If we observe a man
driving a car that was previously stolen, this does not mean that he stole the car. Similarly, the
fact that a man is not driving the car does not mean that he did not steal the car. Driving the car
is neither a necessary nor a sufficient basis for inferring that the man stole the car. While
circumstantial evidence may be logically insufficient, an accumulation of different types of
circumstantial evidence may be sufficient in ordinary experience, and even in court, to prove
causation. For instance, if we find the victims blood on a suspects shoes, if the suspect owned
the murder weapon, and if the suspect had a strong motivation, reasonable people might
conclude that the suspect is guilty. Each of these facts by itself is circumstantial evidence.
Circumstantial evidence is related to the problem referred to by statisticians and scientists as
omitted variable bias. We cannot infer causation from correlation, because there may be an
alternative causal variable that has not been included in our analysis, perhaps even one that
causes both the alleged cause and the illegal effect. Or it may be that the causal relationship is
reversed: the alleged effect actually results in the alleged cause. The tighter the correlation is
and the less plausible the alternatives are, the greater our comfort in inferring causation.
Point: People who smoke cigarettes develop lung cancer at a much greater rate than
people who do not.Counterpoint: Correlation is not causation; for example, it may be
that people who smoke tend to work in jobs with greater workplace air pollutants.
We just do not know.Counter-counterpoint: No, correlation is not necessarily proof
of causation, but once we exclude other causes, correlation provides pretty
persuasive evidence. In other words, once we control for all the things that might
plausibly cause lung cancer, like workplace air pollutants, if the correlation persists,
we have a good idea what is going on.
7.4 Inappropriate Inference from Limited Data
Be careful with rhetorical tricks that relate to statistics. Many times people use them in their
arguments, and they can, in many ways, be misleading. Lies, damn lies, and so on. Most lawyers
and laypersons do not have the expertise of a trained statistician. But we are all advised to think
critically about the statistical inferences that we present or that are presented to us. (74% of
statistics used in argumentation are made up on the spot.)
Without knowledge of statistics, a lawyer might assert that a particular medicine caused heart
disease because nine out of ten patients who took the medicine developed heart disease. But a
statistician might respond that ten patients is too small a sample from which to draw reliable
conclusions. Furthermore, we must know more about the samplehow many of them would
have developed heart disease without the medicine? Perhaps the medicine is used as a lastditch
effort to forestall heart disease, given only to those who will certainly develop heart
disease without it, and the good news is that it is effective in one of ten patients. The lawyer
should know about the rules of inference in the science of statistics in order to be able to
support his argument or at least to anticipate criticisms.
7.5 Occams Razor and the Exception That Proves the Rule
As discussed in Chapter 5, Occams razor is a tool for identifying and refuting your opponents
suggested inferences. It is more a rhetorical defense than a rhetorical trick. Occams razor,
otherwise known as the rule of parsimony, says we should not seek out complicated
explanations when simple ones are available, provided that the simpler ones also account for
the facts. In formal terms, it holds that if there is an explanation of a phenomenon that requires
fewer exceptions or assumptions than another, we should be drawn to the one that requires
fewer. This is not always correctthe more complex explanation may indeed be the correct
onebut the main point is that we do not have any reason to be attracted to the more complex
explanation.
Medical diagnostics is guided by the following version of Occams razor: If you hear hoofbeats, think horses, not
zebras. In diagnosis as in other areas, it often pays to keep it simple, stupid.
Occams razor is not formally a tool of legal analysis, and, in fact, it is more often seen as a tool
of logic or science than of law, but it is a useful general tool of analysis and argument that
definitely has application in legal contexts. As mentioned in our discussion of precedent, it is the
best tool for distinguishing ratione decidendi from obiter dicta.
Going back to our suspect who owns the murder weapon, has a motivation, and has shoes
spattered with the victims blood, we could make assumptions that someone stole or borrowed
the weapon, had his own motivation, and deviously sprinkled the victims blood on the
suspects shoes. And while all these things are possibleand if there were evidence that they
occurred or existed it would be importantwithout such evidence the better inference is that
the original suspect is the murderer. Whether or not his guilt is proven beyond a reasonable
doubt depends on your definition (or a jurys or judges definition) of a reasonable doubt. But
the simpler explanation is more attractive than the more complex explanation that requires us
to explain more exceptional phenomena.
In practical terms, despite the fact that guilt in a criminal case must be proven beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the prosecutor always bears the burden of proof, we might say that the
proponent of the more complex explanation of a phenomenon often informally or implicitly
bears something like a burden of proof. If there is a lot of good circumstantial evidence, and the
defendant has a separate, arcane, and implausible explanation for each one, judges will
implicitly ask whether it is possible that all these strange coincidences occurred in the same
case.
If your alibi is that space aliens abducted you at the time of the crime, you should at least be
able to produce some evidence to support your proposition, like alien artifacts. If you were
observed at the scene of the crime, it will not be helpful to argue that the space aliens might
have constructed a robotic double, which must have committed the crime. If the victims blood
is found on your shoes, it could be true that your dog bit the victim the day before without you
becoming aware of the bite and drooled the blood onto your shoes, but the chances of the
aliens and dog being responsible for all these facts are too small to constitute a reasonable
doubt. Occams razor points us to the simple explanation: you killed the victim.
Point: I have come to conclusion X because it provides the most straightforward
explanation of the facts.Counterpoint: I have provided alternative explanations that
point to conclusion Y.Counter-counterpoint: Yes, but your explanations require me to
assume that a lot of unexpected and implausible circumstances occurredIm going
to go with the simple explanation.
A somewhat different, and more hospitable, approach to exceptions is contained in the
expression the exception that proves the rule. This expression, of course, is nonsense:
exceptions do not prove a rule, but only disprove it, unless the rule is modified to contain an
appropriate exception. Whenever your opponent says that is the exception that proves the
rule, you know that youve got him cornered, because he probably has given little thought to
the way the exception actually disproves the rule or why the rule should be understood as valid
despite the exception. Hes really just pleading with you to ignore the exception.
7.6 When Did You Stop Beating Your Wife? Embedding Assumptions in Questions
It is sometimes possible to sneak an assumption into an argument by embedding the
assumption in a question or in an unrelated statement. If this rhetorical ploy goes unnoticed,
then the assumption goes unchallenged. In the television courtroom crime drama, when the
lawyer does this to the defendant on the witness stand, the jury lets out a collective gasp, and it
is time to cut to a commercial.
Point: At what point did you decide to monopolize the market for personal computer
operating systems?Counterpoint: I never decided to monopolize the market for
personal computer operating systems, so I cannot answer the question as posed.
Nice try.
8
Arguing About Substantive
Responsibility
Although this book is not intended to address substantive legal rules broadly, some substantive
legal rules or doctrines are fundamental to the way lawyers think and argue. Moreover, these
substantive legal rules go to the core of arguments about responsibility, and can be useful in all
sorts of situations.
8.1 The Reasonable Person and Due Diligence
Despite Freuds successful proposition that each of us is greatly influenced by the irrational,
lawyers and legislators share an affinity for a fiction known as the reasonable person. The
reasonable person standard is referenced, either explicitly or implicitly, in many legal rules. The
idea is that if you conform your behavior to that of the reasonable person, you should be
insulated from liability.
In tort lawthe law of civil liability for harmsthe reasonable person standard is used as a
standard of care in common law systems: if you acted with the probity of a reasonable person,
you will not be found negligent and will therefore not be liable for the harm to others that
ensued. You might understand it as an incentive to suppress your irrational tendencies.
The next question, of course, is how do we know what a reasonable person would do? The
reasonable person standard is, to a large extent, defined only in the eye of the beholder, and
the authoritative beholder is the judge or jury in a trial. There will be easy cases and hard cases.
Easy cases involve the drunk driver speeding at 90 miles per hour against traffic on a highway.
Hard cases are when someone comes into your home and trips over your rug.
In order to be a reasonable person, you should engage in a risk assessment of your acts. A full
risk assessment would look like a risk-adjusted cost-benefit analysis, examining (a) the
probability of the risk eventuating, (b) the magnitude of harm if the risk eventuates, (c) the
benefits of the action that entails the risk, and (d) the availability and cost of less risky
alternative measures. In effect, you are required to act reasonably and to value the risk of harm
to others as you would value the risk of harm to yourself: a risk-adjusted golden rule. An
economist would look at this approach with approvalyou may satisfy the reasonable person
standard if the aggregate risk-adjusted social benefits exceed the social costs. But this is cold
comfort to the person who bears the social costs.
Point: Your action resulted in harm to me, and therefore you should compensate
me.Counterpoint: I acted with the care of a reasonable person, and therefore I am
not responsible for harms that ensued to you.Counter-counterpoint: Nevertheless, it
is unfair to force me to bear the costs of your action.
A similar reasonable person concept applies in a wide variety of business law settings,
although it got its start in U.S. securities lawlaw relating to the sales of stocks and bonds. This
is the concept of due diligence, which applies a reasonable person standard to the quality of
investigation by certain persons involved in a securities transaction. Within the context of public
offerings of securities, if the members of the companys board of directors, or if the bankers
facilitating the sale, conduct an investigation of the facts disclosed to buyers that satisfies the
standards of due diligence, then they are insulated from liability under the securities laws even
if those facts turn out to be untrue or incomplete. A due diligence investigation is one that
follows the standard of care that a reasonable person would use in his own investment affairs.
The due diligence term is now used widely beyond the securities law field, both in other legal
fields and in business. In business, it refers to an appropriately careful investigation. The core
idea is that if you did your due diligence no one can criticize you for failure. This type of
reasonable person standard allows each of us to act and to feel confident that if we meet the
reasonable person standard, we will not be subjected to effective criticism. If the standard of
investigation is approved in advance, all the betterthose who approved the scope of
investigation will be estopped from criticizing it, even if the harm it was intended to avoid
eventuates.
Point: You were in charge of preparing for and implementing this corporate
acquisition, and it has turned out terribly, costing us lots of money.Counterpoint: I
did an effective due diligence investigation, and my investigation did not reveal any of
the issues that caused the problems.Counter-counterpoint: An effective investigation
would have identified all of the issues that could possibly have caused significant
problems.
8.2 Exceptional Circumstances: Force Majeure
Law is all about rules and exceptions. However, it can be difficult to distinguish an exception
from a rule. The exception may simply be another rule that conflicts with the first. As a result,
much of legal argument is about the scope of applicability of ruleswhether they were
intended to apply to the case at hand. Another large portion of legal argument deals with the
question of whether the case at hand is so exceptional as to be excluded from the operation of
the rule. Lawyers often argue about what to do when one rule conflicts with anotherdoes one
rule provide an exception from the operation of the other?
Perhaps the most famous case along these lines is that of the trespasser under duress. Consider
the possibility of a sailor, caught unexpectedly in a storm, tying his vessel to a strangers dock
without permission. The owner of the dock sues for trespass: unauthorized entry on the
owners premises. Is the general rule against trespass applicable to persons under duress? Is the
case of a ship at sea in a storm so exceptional as to be excluded from the operation of the
trespass rule? If not, is there an exception for persons under duress?
Is there a difference between the inapplicability of a rule and an exception from the rule? What
about an orthogonal rule, which seems to mandate or permit an action prohibited by the first
rule? Perhaps there is not a difference for laypersons, or in logic, but lawyers may care about
which is the rule and which is the exception because it may make a difference for the allocation
of burdens of proof and persuasion. Usually the complainant has the obligation of proving the
principal case, while the respondent has the burden of proving any exception.
Coming back to our sailor, is there a limitation in the scope of the rule against trespass, is there
an exception to the rule against trespass, or is there a countervailing rule that those in distress
have a right to take shelter reasonably in anothers property, and does this right to shelter
overcome the rule against trespass? We have raised three formal possibilities: inapplicability of
the rule, an exception from the rule, and a conflicting rule that supervenes the first rule. These
formal legal possibilities would have analogs in non-legal discourse about the propriety of a
sailor using a strangers dock in a storm.
Similar questions about rules and exceptions arise where two parties enter into a contract, and
one promises a specified performance. What happens if something subsequently happens,
causing the promised performance to become impossible, much more costly, illegal, or useless
to the promisee? These are the legal doctrines of impossibility, impracticability, illegality, and
frustration. Impossibility means that performance has become literally or practically
impossible. Impracticability means that it is more practically impossible, or too costly.
Illegality in this context means that the law, it turns out, prohibits the performance.
Frustration means that the performance by the promisor is no longer useful to the promisee.
Depending on the legal system involved, and depending on whether your contract has a clause
that specifies what to do if these types of occurrences arise, if the acts required by the contract
become impossible, impracticable, or illegal, performance by the promisor might be excused.
This would implicitly place the burden of the occurrence arising on the promiseethe person
owed the performance. The idea of frustration is that the reason why the promisee wanted the
promisor to perform the requisite act no longer exists. So, if I hired a personal hairdresser for a
term of ten years, and immediately became bald, I might argue that the contract was frustrated.
These types of exceptional-circumstance cases are illustrations of the problem of
incompleteness in the law: in statutes, in case law, and in contracts. This problem of
incompleteness can be addressed by greater completion: by writing force majeure clauses that
can direct how these types of cases shall be resolved. A force majeure clause specifies different
types of events that may occur and directs how these events shall be handled.
Alternatively, the problem of incompleteness can be addressed by reference to adjudication.
But the adjudicator needs principles by which to resolve the case. In a sense, if the adjudicator
is given specific instructions, then the laws and contracts are completed by these precise
instructions. Where the adjudicator is given more general instructions, we can still say that the
laws or contracts are completed, but the adjudicator has a greater role to play and perhaps
greater discretion.
Point: Your contractual obligation is clearyou must perform it.Counterpoint: Even
though the contract does not provide an explicit exception were performance of my
obligation to become impossible or impractical, generally applicable law does. So, my
performance is excused.Counter-counterpoint: By stating your obligation in a clear
and unqualified way, our contract was intended to place the burden of problems that
might arise squarely on your shoulders.
8.3 Form Versus Substance
Like a parent who makes rules for her children, the legal system is constantly trying to set rules
and to make sure that the regulated person does not find loopholes. Nowhere is this problem
more endemic than in the U.S. tax system. Tax collectors try to set tax rules to differentiate
between different types of circumstances, and taxpayers immediately structure their affairs to
try to take advantage of low-tax treatment.
For example, if there is a lower capital gains rate, compared to the rate of tax on ordinary
income, taxpayers try to restructure their income as capital gains instead of ordinary income.
How can they do this? Recently, in the U.S., hedge fund managers have structured their
compensation as a carried interest, in which they receive a share of the investment, which
they argue is a capital asset producing capital gain rather than ordinary income as
compensation for their services. For another example, instead of accepting an ordinary income
royalty for licensing the use of a patent, the inventor of the technology might seek to sell the
patent in the form of a capital asset, or place the patent in a corporation and sell the shares of
stock of the corporation. The tax collector might attack this, piercing through the formal
arrangements to find the ordinary income substance.
Unfortunately, the decision whether to respect form, or to look through the form to the
substance, is often made in unpredictable ways. This form versus substance debate brings us
back to some of our discussions of interpretation earlier in the book: do we follow the simple
text of the law or contract, or do we interpret or apply it so as to effect its purposes, or so as to
give it effet utile? But what does the principle of effet utile counsel: does it argue that we
should give effect to the loopholes, or does it argue that we should interpret the law so as to
give it useful effect in taxation? If we extend the law beyond its text, are we engaging in judicial
legislation, or are we violating the principle of expressio unius?
The form versus substance debate is often a result of the under-inclusiveness of the actual
wording of the rule set forth in the law or contract. The argument to have substance prevail is
an argument to remedy the perceived under-inclusiveness. However, it is not necessarily
appropriate to assume that the law or rule is under-inclusive, or to put it another way, the
under-inclusiveness might have been intentional. That is, it might have been intended not to
cover the additional class of acts that are now argued to be covered by the substance of the
rule. This seems entirely plausible in the area of tax, where lobbyists may have worked very
hard to obtain loopholes to the formal application of the tax.
Point: My actions comply with the word of the lawCounterpoint: But they violate the
spirit of the law.Counter-counterpoint: But the greater spirit of the law is the rule of
law, under which the law prohibits only those acts that are covered by the actual
words of the law.
8.4 Law Versus Equity
The law versus equity debate is the converse of the form versus substance debate. In
addition to the formal legal rules sometimes leaving loopholesbeing under-inclusivelegal
rules can also include an error of over-inclusiveness. Remember that all laws and all contracts
are incomplete in their ability to specify what is to be addressed and what is not. This
incompleteness can take the form of under-inclusiveness, but it can just as easily take the form
of over-inclusiveness.
The rule can be written too broadly and therefore have unintended, or even absurd,
consequences. Recall the rule of interpretation that mandates that we avoid absurdity. The
Bolognian rule against spilling blood in the streets seemed to prevent medical care, such as it
was. In the common law system, the concept of equity was developed in order to modify the
formal law to relieve over-inclusiveness.
The history of the division and reunification of law and equity is worth recounting briefly. The
early common law system that was developed in England was viewed as being, at times, hyperformalist,
with the result that it got some things wrongthe results were unintended or
absurd. It was understood that the courts were the representatives of the king, and so it was
recognized that individuals could petition the king for redress where the application of the strict
letter of the law by the courts resulted in what the petitioner felt was inequitable. As this
petitioning became institutionalized, specialized courts of equity were developed to
determine whether redress should be available. Over time, the equity function has been
merged back into the courts of law, but the idea continues to be to relieve the burdens of strict
formal application of law.
Point: My actions comply with the spirit of the law, and it would be inequitable to
apply the formal law to me.Counterpoint: But they violate the letter of the
law.Counter-counterpoint: The application of the law should be constrained so that
the law is not applied inequitably.
You can readily see how this type of letter versus spirit argument would play out in all sorts of
situations where there are rules: employment, sports, and school, among others.
8.5 Rights Versus Duties: Noses Versus Fists
The great judge Oliver Wendell Holmes observed that The right to swing my fist ends where
the other mans nose begins.
What if you put your nose somewhere that it does not belong? To put it another way, does your
right to swing your nose end where the other mans fist begins? To state this simply, and
generally, we might say that my rights end at your rights. That, of course, sharpens the conflict
and makes its resolution less obvious: does the nose always get priority over the fist? Often,
arguments involve multiple conflicting rights. Sometimes, my vision of my right seems to go
beyond your nose.
The possibility of a conflict among rights is easy to see in arguments in the U.S. about abortion,
where rights of others are argued to go considerably beyond a womans nose. Here, we have a
conflict between rights of the fetus to develop into a child and live, rights of the mother to
determine whether she will carry the fetus to term, rights of the father or potential
grandparents over the same issue, and rights of others in society to avoid funding abortions.
There are rights, or what some see as alleged rights, everywhere, and they conflict with one
another.
Without taking sides, lets look at the debate about whether Catholic hospitals may be required
to provide to their employees health insurance that includes coverage of the costs of
contraception, including abortion-inducing drugs. Under an Obama administration policy,
religious organizations are not required to pay these directly, but the insurance companies are
required to cover them for free, and you can be sure that the insurance companies will find
ways to cover their costs in the fees that they charge their clients. If we consider substance
rather than form, the services are not free. So, to keep this simple, lets cut through these
complex facts by assuming without further evaluation that money paid by Catholic hospitals for
their employees health insurance is fungible, that at least indirectly, the Catholic hospitals are
paying something for contraception services to their employees, and that these services include
abortion.
Rights-talk definitely becomes indeterminate to settle the debate. First, Catholics (and others)
feel strongly about the right to life of the fetus. Second, the Supreme Court of the United States
has found that a womans right to determine whether to have an abortion is a constitutionallyprotected
privacy right. (Some hope that this precedent will be overturned.) Third, the Catholic
hospitals argue that they have a collective right to freedom of religion that prevents
government from ordering them to provide insurance that indirectly pays for abortions. Fourth,
under U.S. law, the employees of the hospital have a right to health insurance that includes
coverage of contraception.
My main point is that there are rights everywhere, and that simply calling something a right
does not end the argument. Just about e