

Copyright  2016 by Thomas Sowell
Published in the United States by Basic Books, an imprint of Perseus Books, a division of PBG
Publishing, LLC, a subsidiary of Hachette Book Group, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical articles and reviews.
For information, address Basic Books, 250 West 57th Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10107.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the
Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group,
2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200,
Philadelphia, PA 19103,
or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016937086
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 978-0-465-09677-0 (e-book)
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
CONTENTS
Preface
Chapter 1: Issues
PART I: GEOGRAPHIC FACTORS
Chapter 2: Waterways
Chapter 3: Lands
Chapter 4: Climate, Animals and Diseases
PART II: CULTURAL FACTORS
Chapter 5: Culture and Economics
Chapter 6: Cultural Diffusion
Chapter 7: Culture and Progress
PART III: SOCIAL FACTORS
Chapter 8: Population
Chapter 9: Mental Capabilities
PART IV: POLITICAL FACTORS
Chapter 10: Political Institutions
Chapter 11: Politics and Diversity
Chapter 12: The Welfare State
PART V: CONCLUSIONS
Chapter 13: Economic Differences
Chapter 14: Implications and Prospects
Chapter 15: Causation versus Blame
Chapter 16: Goals
Acknowledgements
Notes
Index
B
P R E FA C E
Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our
inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, they cannot alter the state
of facts and evidence. . .
John Adams
oth the first edition of this book and this revised and enlarged edition
differ fundamentally from most other discussions of economic
differences between nations and within nations. The many policy proposals
for ending poverty, or reducing income gaps, disparities or inequities,
which abound in other discussions of economic inequalities, will not be
found here.
The humanitarian goals of these many policy proposals are important.
But, precisely because those goals are so important, it is crucial that these
proposals be based on an understanding of the actual facts about the causes
and consequences of economic inequalities. This book seeks to clarify some
of those causes and consequences. If this seems like a modest task, it is a
task whose neglect has led to many plausible-sounding policies that turned
out to be not only ineffective but painfully counterproductive and in some
cases catastrophic. It is especially painful when policies to help the poor
misfire and leave the poor worse off, since they have less margin with
which to absorb the consequences of other peoples errors.
Many who are shocked and puzzled by large economic and other
disparities between individuals, groups or nations have been driven to seek
some single, key factor whether genetics, exploitation or whatever to
explain why some are so prosperous and others so poor. The implicit
assumption seems to be that people would not differ so much in their
outcomes without some major differentiating factor, whether caused by
genes or by human interventions that favor some at the expense of others.
But where there are endeavors with great disparities in outcomes, that does
not necessarily imply equally great disparities among the people engaged in
that endeavor.
In many endeavors, there are multiple prerequisites for success, so that
people with nine-tenths of those prerequisites need not be successful ninetenths
as often, but may in fact turn out to be utter failures. Because many
economic and other endeavors require multiple factors, those individuals,
groups or nations with most of those factors, but not all, can be povertystricken
and backwards for generations or even centuries and then
suddenly surge to the forefront of human achievements, after they acquire
whatever remaining factor or factors might be required. Examples such as
eighteenth century Scotland and nineteenth century Japan will be examined
in the chapters that follow.
Conversely, a nation in the forefront of human achievements for
centuries can lose just one of the prerequisites of success and fall far behind
the economic and technological progress of many other nations that
formerly lagged behind it. China, as we shall see, was an example of such a
retrogression, which it is currently in the process of reversing again, as
Chinas economic and technological levels are rising rapidly.
This is not a book written to celebrate, or to demonize, any particular
racial or ethnic group, or any nation or civilization. It is an attempt to
understand the effects of various factors that influence the economic fates
of human beings in general. Rather than try to discuss such things in the
abstract, hard facts about particular flesh-and-blood peoples are examined.
Some of these facts may be inspiring and others appalling, but in neither
case do these facts or factors provide a basis for grading or ranking whole
peoples.
Even as we avoid attempting to grade or rank the intrinsic merits of
whole peoples, caught in a web of surrounding geographic, historic and
other circumstances they did not choose, and equipped with a culture they
did not choose, inherited from ancestors they did not choose, we cannot go
to the other extreme and pretend that all their achievements are equally
valuable, or even approximately comparable. On the contrary, one of the
things we can at least hope to accomplish is to gain some insights into
which kinds of factors have promoted human achievements and progress,
and which have led to suffering and ruin.
It so happens that the illustrations here involving Russians, for example,
show various negative factors, but these illustrations cannot pretend to be a
grading or ranking of Russians, which would require also considering many
internationally recognized Russian achievements over the centuries in
literature, music and other fields, as well as great courageous stands against
tyrannies that have arisen in their country, such as the monumentally heroic
example of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in our own times. But that would be a
very different, and vastly larger, book. The task undertaken here is more
limited, and much more within the limits of human understanding and the
human life span.
One of the key implicit assumptions of our time is that many economic
and social outcomes would tend to be either even or random, if left to the
natural course of events, so that the strikingly uneven and non-random
outcomes so often observed in the real world imply either some adverse
human intervention or else some genetic differences in the people whose
outcomes are so different.
Assumptions that remain implicit can escape scrutiny, even by people
who build a whole structure of beliefs and imperatives on the foundation of
such assumptions. With a decline of belief in genetic determinism, the
implicit assumption of evenness or randomness of outcomes in the absence
of human interventions has been enough to turn a search for causation into a
search for blame. Declarations of blame may be in the raucous voices of
street corner demagogues or in the hushed tones of learned judges in august
judicial chambers. In many contexts, this has reduced explanatory options
to blaming the victim or blaming presumed victimizers.
As a result, even among some academic scholars the search for truth has
too often been narrowed to searching for blame or to taking sides. One
small but revealing sign of this taking sides is blocking the release of data
to people on the other side, who might use that data against our side
whether the particular issue is affirmative action, global warming or
whatever. More generally, taking sides can all too easily mean treating
social issues involving the fate of millions of fellow human beings as if they
were just intramural contests among intellectuals or politicians.
Yet, in the absence of the implicit assumption of evenness or
randomness, a search for causation turns up many factors that are far from
even or random, including geographic, demographic, cultural and political
factors with great influence on outcomes, even if none of these factors may
be enough to determine outcomes by itself. This book examines such
factors, not exclusively, but in addition to other factors, including some for
which human beings can be blamed, such as conquests and enslavement
but with no presumption that those things which arouse our moral
indignation have more causal weight than those things which we see as
simply matters of fact. This does not imply moral neutrality, but simply a
recognition that morality and causation are different things, and that the
great importance of each is a reason to avoid confusing one with the other.
In addition to the problems of implicit assumptions which escape
scrutiny precisely because they are implicit, much confusion and mischief
can result from words which have so many different meanings that they can
spawn mutually contradictory beliefs, imperatives and policies. Equality,
freedom and justice are among the words which have played that role,
though each of these concepts can be defined more precisely in ways that
bring out their enormous importance in specific contexts.
Yet that very importance has led to these words being used in very
different senses for very different purposes by politicians, ideologues and
others. It is in these inconsistent and even mutually contradictory senses
that many concepts deserve the warning of philosopher Charles Sanders
Peirce against cherishing some vague shadow of an idea, too meaningless
to be positively false.1
Such chameleon-like words are very convenient for politicians and
ideologues, and for that very reason require special scrutiny by others who
do not wish to be trapped by words. Even statistics that may be accurate in
themselves can be extremely misleading, if the words that say what the
statistics are measuring are incorrect. This applies to much that is said about
the top ten percent, the top one percent, and other income categories, as
we shall see, all too often.
Wealth, Poverty and Politics is not a book about language or
philosophy, however. It is a book about facts. But facts do not speak for
themselves. They speak for or against competing beliefs or competing
theories. If the study of facts cannot always be definitive, it can at least be
clarifying. And there are few issues more in need of clarification than issues
involving wealth, poverty and politics.
Thomas Sowell
The Hoover Institution
Stanford University
I
Chapter 1
I S S U E S
The wealth of nations depends upon an infinite variety of causes.
Alexander Hamilton
t may be both understandable and commendable that people living in the
most prosperous nations today are often shocked by the far lower
standards of living in Third World countries, or by how the less fortunate
people in their own society live. But, if our purpose is to understand the
causes of such things, we cannot proceed as if what we happen to be used to
around us is something that can be assumed to happen so naturally or
automatically that the issue can be posed as to why other nations fail
when they do not have the same high standards of living, as suggested by
the title of a well-known contemporary study.a The subtitle of another wellknown
contemporary study includes the origins of inequality,b as if
economic equality is so natural, automatic or common that its absence is
what needs explaining.
Despite how widespread such implicit assumptions may be in much that
is said today, it is questionable whether such assumptions can survive even
a modest survey of history. Even in a country long recognized as one of the
most prosperous on earth, the United States of America, at the beginning of
the twentieth century only ten percent of American homes had flush toilets
and only 3 percent had electric lights.1 There is nothing automatic about
prosperity. Standards of living that we take for granted today have been
achieved only within a very minute fraction of the history of the human
race, and are by no means the norm among most of the people in the world
today. Standards of living far below what we would consider to be poverty
have been the norm for untold thousands of years. It is not the origins of
poverty which need to be explained, since the human species began in
poverty. What requires explaining are the things that created and sustained
higher standards of living.
Equality of economic outcomes has been even rarer than prosperity.
How does one explain the origins of something like inequality, which has
been ubiquitous as far back as recorded history goes?
The ancient Greeks had geometry, philosophy, architecture and
literature at a time when Britain was a land of illiterate tribal peoples, living
at a primitive level. Athens had the Acropolis whose ruins are still
impressive today, thousands of years later at a time when there was not a
single building in all of Britain. The ancient Greeks had Plato, Aristotle,
Euclid and other landmark figures who helped lay the intellectual
foundations of Western civilization, at a time when there was not a single
Briton whose name had entered the pages of history.
Scholars have estimated that there were parts of Europe in ancient times
that were living at a level that Greece had transcended thousands of years
earlier.2 There were other complex civilizations in the ancient world in
Egypt, India and China, for example at a time when peoples in various
parts of Europe and elsewhere were just beginning to learn the rudiments of
agriculture.3
Vast disparities in wealth, and in wealth-creating capacity, have been
common for millennia. But while large economic inequalities have persisted
throughout the recorded history of the human race, the particular pattern of
those inequalities has changed drastically over the centuries.
While Greeks were far more advanced than Britons in ancient times,
Britons were far more advanced than Greeks in the nineteenth century,
when Britain led the world into the industrial age. Britain alone produced
more than 40 percent of the major inventions, discoveries and innovations
in the world, from the mid-eighteenth century to the first quarter of the
nineteenth century.4 Its technological preeminence was matched by its
preeminence as a conquering nation. A twentieth century Italian scholar
asked, How, in the first place, did a peripheral island rise from primitive
squalor to world domination?5 At its peak, the British Empire included
one-fourth of the land area of the world and one-fourth of all the people on
earth.
Such historic changes in the roles of particular peoples and nations have
occurred in other places and other times. The Chinese were for centuries
more advanced than any of the Europeans, including among their
discoveries and inventions the compass, printing, paper, rudders and the
porcelain plates that the West called chinaware or simply china. Cast
iron was produced in China a thousand years before it was produced in
Europe.6 A Chinese admiral made a voyage of discovery longer than
Columbus voyage, generations before Columbus voyage, and in ships
larger and more advanced than Columbus ships.7 But the relative positions
of China and Europe also reversed over the centuries. Various other
peoples, living in various other parts of the world, have had their own eras
of leadership in particular fields or in advances across many specialties.
Agriculture, the most life-changing advance in the evolution of human
societies, came to Europe from the Middle East in ancient times.
Agriculture made cities possible, while hunter-gatherers required far too
much land to provide themselves with food for them to settle permanently
in such compact and densely populated communities. Moreover, for
centuries cities around the world have produced a wholly disproportionate
share of all the advances in the arts, sciences and technology, compared to
the achievements of a similar number of people scattered in the
hinterlands.8
Because Greeks were located nearer to the Middle East than the peoples
of Northern Europe or Western Europe, agriculture spread to the Greeks
earlier and they could become urbanized earlier by centuries and
advanced in many ways far beyond those peoples elsewhere who had not
yet received the many benefits made possible by urban living. The accident
of geographic location could not create genius, but it made possible a
setting in which many people could develop their own mental potential far
beyond what was possible among bands of hunter-gatherers roaming over
vast territory, preoccupied with the pressing need to search for food.
Geography does not predetermine what people will choose to do, but it can
limit or expand the number and kind of options available.
Geography is just one of the influences behind vast economic
differences among peoples and places. Moreover, these differences are not
simply differences in standards of living, important as such differences are.
Different geographic settings also expand or restrict the development of
peoples own mental potential into what economists call their human capital
by presenting different peoples with access to a wider or narrower cultural
universe. These geographic settings differ not only horizontally as
between Europe, Asia and Africa, for example but also vertically, as
between peoples living on the plains versus peoples living up in the
mountains. As one geographic study put it:
Mountain regions discourage the budding of genius because they are areas of
isolation, confinement, remote from the great currents of men and ideas that move
along the river valleys.9
Many mountain regions around the world whether the Appalachian
Mountains in the United States, the Rif Mountains of Morocco, the Pindus
Mountains of Greece, the Himalayas in Asia or other mountains elsewhere
 show very similar patterns of poverty and backwardness. As
distinguished French historian Fernand Braudel put it, Mountain life
persistently lagged behind the plain.10 This was especially so during the
millennia before the transportation and communications revolutions of the
past two centuries, which belatedly brought more of the progress of the
outside world to isolated mountain villages. What these technological
revolutions could not bring to the mountains, however, were the previous
centuries of cultural development that other people had in more favorable
environments. Peoples living in mountains could try to catch up, but of
course the rest of the world would not be standing still while they were
doing so.
Mountains are just one geographic feature, and geography is just one
influence on human development. But whether considering geography or
culture, isolation is a recurring factor in poverty and backwardness around
the world, whether that is physical isolation or cultural isolation, for any
number of particular reasons that will be explored in the chapters ahead.
Whatever the reasons for economic disparities among peoples and
nations, such disparities have been as common in modern times as in
ancient times. In the twenty-first century, Switzerland, Denmark and
Germany have each had more than three times the per capita Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) of Albania, Serbia or Ukraine, and Norway has
had more than five times the per capita GDP of these Eastern European
countries.11 Such economic disparities are not peculiar to Europe. In Asia as
well, Japan has more than three times the per capita GDP of China and
more than nine times the per capita GDP of India.12 Sub-Saharan Africa has
less than one-tenth the per capita GDP of the countries of the Euro zone.13
Within nations, as well as between nations, income disparities abound,
whether between classes, races or other subdivisions of the human species.
Reactions to these economic disparities have ranged from resignation to
revolution. Because many people regard these disparities in their own
country as strange, if not sinister, it is necessary to note that such internal
disparities are not peculiar to any particular time or place. Therefore
explanations of economic differences cannot be confined to factors peculiar
to a particular time or place, such as the era of modern capitalism or the
industrial revolution,14 much less to factors that are politically convenient
or emotionally satisfying.
Factors which raise morally momentous issues, such as conquest and
enslavement, cannot automatically be assumed to be equally momentous as
causal explanations of current economic disparities. They may be or they
may not, in particular cases. Peoples or nations may be rich or poor because
(1) they produced more or produced less than others or (2) they seized more
of what others had produced or had what they produced seized from them.
What anyone might prefer to believe at a given place or time has nothing to
do with what the hard facts are.
There is no question that the Spaniards conquests in the Western
Hemisphere, for example, not only brutalized the conquered peoples and
destroyed viable civilizations, but also drained vast amounts of existing
wealth in gold and silver from the Western Hemisphere to Spain 200 tons
of gold and more than 18,000 tons of silver15 the result of the looting of
existing treasures from the indigenous peoples and the forced labor of that
same population in gold and silver mines. Nor was Spain unique in such
behavior. But the question here, however, is: To what extent can transfers of
wealth explain economic differences between peoples and nations in the
world today?
Spain is today one of the poorer countries in Western Europe, surpassed
economically by countries like Switzerland and Norway, which have never
had such empires. The vast wealth that poured into Spain in its golden
age could have been invested in its economy or in its people. But it was
not. It was spent. Spaniards themselves spoke of gold as pouring down on
Spain like rain on a roof, flowing on away immediately.16 Nor has it been
uncommon in history for a vast amount of human suffering whether by
conquered or enslaved people to produce nothing more than a transient
enrichment of a ruling elite.
The monumental moral depredations of Spain in the Western
Hemisphere had very little causal effect on the long-run prosperity of the
Spanish economy. As late as 1900, more than half the people in Spain were
still illiterate,17 while most blacks in the United States were literate, despite
having been free for less than 50 years.18 A century later, in 2000, the real
per capita income in Spain was slightly lower than the real per capita
income of black Americans.19 Descendants of other great conquerors, such
as the founders of the Ottoman Empire or the hordes of Genghis Khan, have
likewise failed to appear among the most prosperous nations of the world
today.
Conversely, some groups expelled from the land of their birth, and
forced to leave behind the bulk of the material assets they had accumulated
over a lifetime, or over generations surely a great injustice nevertheless
rose to prosperity again after arriving destitute in their new lands. These
groups range from the Jews expelled from Spain in 1492 to the Gujaratis
expelled from Uganda in the 1970s, while the Cubans who voluntarily fled
their homeland after Communists took over in 1958, and the Vietnamese
who fled their homeland after the Communists took over there in the 1970s,
had a very similar rebound from poverty to prosperity in new countries.
Morally important issues are not necessarily decisive as causal factors.
Moral questions and causal questions are both important. But confusing
one with the other, or imagining that they can simply be combined into one
politically or ideologically attractive package, is not a very promising
approach to an explanation of economic differences.
Economic disparities among nations are just part of the story of
economic inequalities. Large economic disparities within nations also need
to be addressed. When considering economic differences among the people
of a given country, there is a tendency to see these differences as issues
about what is called income distribution.20 But real income that is,
money income adjusted for inflation consists of the goods and services
produced in the nation. To look at this output solely from the viewpoint of
those receiving money for having produced those goods and services risks
needless misconceptions, and serious social problems growing out of
misconceptions.
The standard of living of a nation depends more on its output per capita
than on the money received as income for producing that output. Otherwise,
the government could make us all rich, simply by printing more money. By
focusing on what is called income distribution, many people proceed as if
the government can rearrange these flows of money, so as to have incomes
become more fair however defined disregarding what the
repercussions of such a policy might be on the more fundamental process of
producing goods and services, on which a countrys standard of living
depends. But in the vision presented in the media, and often even in
academia, it is as if output or wealth just exist somehow, and the really
interesting question is how it is distributed.
Sometimes this preoccupation with the receipt of incomes, to the
neglect of attention to the production of the output behind that receipt of
incomes, can lead to attempts to explain the receipt of very large incomes
by greed as if an insatiable desire for vast amounts of money will
somehow cause others to pay those vast amounts to buy ones goods or
services.
Among the many possible causes of differences in income and wealth,
whether among peoples, regions or nations, one of the most obvious is often
ignored. As economist Henry Hazlitt put it:
The real problem of poverty is not a problem of distribution but of production.
The poor are poor not because something is being withheld from them but because,
for whatever reason, they are not producing enough.21
What seemed obvious to Henry Hazlitt was not obvious to many others,
who have had alternative visions, with alternative agendas based on those
visions. The difference between seeing economic disparities as due to
differences in the production of wealth and seeing those disparities as due
to the transfer of wealth from some people to other people is fundamental.
History shows that either cause of economic disparities can prevail at
particular times and places.
When exploring the influences of geographic, cultural and other factors
affecting the production of wealth, a sharp distinction must be made
between influence and determinism. Geographic determinism would have
particular favorable natural settings more or less directly create economic
prosperity and social advancement, whether by providing richer natural
resources or by having a climate more conducive to working, for example.
It was easy enough for critics to show that this was by no means always
the case, nor necessarily true in most cases, since there are poverty-stricken
countries like Venezuela and Nigeria with rich natural resources and
prosperous countries like Japan and Switzerland with meager natural
resources. While certain kinds of climates may have been highly correlated
with more advanced societies, as an early twentieth century geographer
sought to show22 a very different ranking of nations, by the same criteria,
would have existed a thousand, or two thousand years earlier, when China
was much more advanced than Japan, while Japan eventually became more
economically and technologically advanced than China, thousands of years
later without any evidence that the climate had changed much in either
country.
The explanatory over-reach of geographic explanations led not only to a
dismissal of geographic determinism, but also to a downgrading of
geography as a major influence in other senses. Yet not all early twentieth
century geographers were guilty of reckless over-reach. Distinguished
geographer Ellen Churchill Semple wrote in 1911: The whole science of
anthropo-geography is as yet too young for hard-and-fast rules, and its
subject matter too complex for formulas.23 Despite the failure of
geographic determinism, geography can influence economic outcomes in
other, very different ways, as we shall see. Moreover, this influence is not
necessarily due to particular geographic features such as climate or
natural resources considered in isolation, but is often due to interactions
among particular geographic features with other geographic features, as
well as interactions with other, non-geographic factors such as cultural,
demographic, political or other influences.
Even such a simple and undisputed geographic fact as places located
nearer the poles having lower temperatures, on average, than places located
nearer the equator, does not always hold up when interactions with other
geographic factors are taken into account. Thus London, which is hundreds
of miles farther north than Boston, has average winter temperatures warmer
than those in Boston, and very similar to winter temperatures in some
American cities hundreds of miles south of Boston.24 The average
December daily high temperature in London is the same as the average
December daily high temperature in Washington, D.C., which is more than
850 miles farther south than London.25 Latitude matters, but so too does the
varying warmth of different ocean currents, c and the interaction of the two
can create very different outcomes from what either would produce by
itself.
When particular geographic factors interact with other, non-geographic
factors as well, the outcomes can likewise be very different from what they
would be if considering particular geographic, cultural, demographic or
political factors in isolation. That is why influence is not the same as
determinism. Since many, if not most, economic outcomes depend on more
than one factor, the likelihood of all the factors coming together in such a
way as to produce equal levels of prosperity and progress among peoples
and nations around the world seems very remote. Radically different
geographic settings are just one of the factors making equal economic
outcomes unlikely.
Cultures are among the other factors that differ greatly among peoples
and nations, as well as among individuals and groups within a given nation.
Like critics of geographic influences, critics of cultural influences have
likewise sometimes resorted to an oversimplified picture of those influences
to criticize. For example, an attempt to discredit the influence of cultural
factors in economic outcomes by a well-known study Why Nations Fail
 rejected the idea that the culture inherited from England explained why
former colonies of England like the United States, Canada and Australia
were prosperous:
Canada and the United States were English colonies, but so were Sierra Leone
and Nigeria. The variation in prosperity within former English colonies is as great
as that in the entire world. The English legacy is not the reason for the success of
North America.26
While it is true that all these countries are former colonies of England,
and thus might be described as having been influenced by the culture of
England, it is also true that the people who founded Canada and the United
States were Englishmen, descendants of people steeped in the culture of
England as it unfolded over the centuries while people in Sierra Leone
and Nigeria were descendants of people steeped in the very different
cultures of a region of sub-Saharan Africa for many centuries, and exposed
superficially to the culture of England for less than one century, during
which their own indigenous cultures were by no means extinguished in the
historically brief period when they were part of the British Empire. French
historian Fernand Braudel referred to the late and ephemeral colonization
of Black Africa by the European powers in the nineteenth century.27 This
was hardly enough to culturally turn Africans into Europeans.
Many former English colonies populated by non-English peoples
continued to observe some aspect of the culture of England after becoming
independent lawyers wearing wigs in court, for example but these
outward observances of English traditions did not prevent these former
colonies from having a fundamentally very different cultural legacy from
that of England, and correspondingly very different economic and political
experiences going forward after independence. The attempt to discredit the
influence of culture, by lumping together former colonies of Englishmen
and former colonies of Africans ruled by Englishmen, only shows that
virtually any belief, about almost anything, can be shown to be wrong if
stated in a sufficiently simple-minded way.
Believers in genetic determinism likewise seek to discredit cultural
factors, which compete with their own view that it is innate, genetic
differences in intelligence which explain differences in economic disparities
among races, nations and civilizations. But genetic determinism, based on
undeniable contemporary differences in per capita incomes among nations
and corresponding differences in mental test scores,28 cannot explain
equally undeniable radical changes in which particular races, nations or
civilizations have been far ahead and which have been far behind in
different periods of history the Chinese and the Europeans being just one
example of historic role reversals out of many.
Nations which went from being poor and backward to reaching the front
ranks of human achievement in a century Scotland, for example,
beginning in the eighteenth century and Japan, beginning in the nineteenth
century have changed faster than genetic makeup seems likely to change,
and in fact with no indication of any genetic changes at all, though there are
many indications of cultural changes in both these cases. Researchers may
be frustrated by the fact that the origins of particular cultures are often lost
in the mists of time, though their contemporary manifestations are visible.
Culture also does not lend itself to quantification, as a genetic determinist
has complained,29 and therefore cannot produce statistical analyses, such as
that showing a high correlation between nations IQ scores and their per
capita incomes.30 Such correlations may lend an air of scientific precision,
but so did earlier correlations between climate and prosperity by a
geographic determinist.31
Both sets of correlations are from data taken in an extremely thin slice
of time, compared to the many millennia of human history, during which
various peoples and nations relative achievements have changed greatly.
Moreover, as statisticians have often pointed out, correlation is not
causation and, as was said years ago: It is better to be roughly right than
precisely wrong.32
Whether considering cultural, geographic, political or other factors,
interactions of these various factors are part of the reason why
understanding influences is very different from claiming determinism.
a Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity,
and Poverty (New York: Crown Business, 2012).
b Angus Deaton, The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2013).
c The Gulf Stream, originating in the subtropical waters of the Gulf of Mexico, flows northeastward
through the Atlantic Ocean past the British Isles, creating milder winters in Western Europe than at
the same latitudes in Eastern Europe, Asia or North America.
PART I:
GEOGRAPHIC FACTORS
The world has never been a level playing field, and
everything costs.
David S. Landes
We all know that different tribes, races, nations and civilizations
originated in different parts of the world. What we may not all
know is how different the geographic settings have been in which each
segment of the human species evolved its own way of life, or how recently
 as history is measured these different segments have become aware of
the great variety of other segments, during what has been a recent, minute
fraction of the many thousands of years that humans have existed. Even
after knowledge of adjacent peoples began to spread to those beyond them,
to a wider range of knowledge of others, and longer distance contact with
them, it has nevertheless been only since the last years of the fifteenth
century A.D. that each hemisphere has learned of the existence of the other
half of the planet.
The settings in which different peoples evolved their different cultures,
economies and histories may seem on the surface to be roughly similar,
since all inhabited continents have rivers, mountains and plains, for
example. But a closer examination of geographic settings shows how
radically different some of those rivers, mountains and plains are from other
rivers, mountains and plains in other regions of the world and how
different have been the opportunities they have provided for economic
prosperity and, even more important, human development. Geography is
not egalitarian. The disparities in geographic settings, and in the
phenomena which arise from those settings, are at least as striking as the
economic disparities that many people find so surprising.
The international concentration of tornadoes, for example, is more
extreme than the international concentration of wealth. Far more tornadoes
occur in the middle of the United States than in any other country, or in all
of the other countries of the world combined.1 The annual hours of sunshine
in Athens are nearly double the annual hours of sunshine in London, and in
Alexandria the annual hours of sunshine are more than double the annual
hours of sunshine in London.2 Earthquakes are as common around the rim
of the Pacific in both Asia and the Western Hemisphere as they are rare
around the rim of the Atlantic.3
Gross disparities are common in nature: There are some insects that live
only one day,4 while turtles, like people, often live more than half a century,
and some live more than a century,5 while some redwood trees have lived
for thousands of years.6
Sometimes we may legitimately speak in generalities about such
geographic regions as the tropics or mountains or deserts. But, when we
consider the respective environments in which different peoples and
cultures have evolved, we need to be very specific about the characteristics
of those particular geographic environments. The Appalachian Mountains
are not the Alps or the Andes, and the Zaire River is not economically the
equal of the Mississippi or the Yangtze, even though it has more water than
either, because the Zaire has so many cascades and waterfalls that it cannot
provide the same long-range transportation that these other rivers provide.
Rivers can also vary greatly in their usefulness to human beings, due to
interactions with climate, since rainfall and melting snow determine how
much water a river receives, and sunlight determines how much water is
evaporated. About 80 percent of the precipitation falling on Africa is lost to
evaporation,7 and it is common for the abundant summer sunshine around
the Mediterranean to evaporate more water than the rainfall brings during
the summer in that region of the world.8 Another effect of climates on rivers
is that freezing weather anywhere can stop a river from flowing at all,
reducing its economic value to zero until it thaws. This happens often, and
for months at a time, in some regions of the world and never in some
other regions, with many variations in between.
Mountains are another geographic factor with major impacts on the
lives of people living in those mountains, as well as very different impacts
on the lives of people living on the lands below. Mountains are the homes
of roughly 10 to 12 percent of the worlds population,9 which may seem
small, but the total population living in mountains around the world is much
larger than the population of the United States, and of all but two other
nations, China and India. But these mountain populations have produced no
such scientific, economic or technological advances as those of the United
States, or even of countries with much smaller populations, such as Italy or
France. The geographic constrictions of mountain life have left many
mountain peoples both poor and backward. Yet despite many patterns
common among mountain peoples on different continents, there are
exceptions in some mountains whose particular topography offers more
favorable prospects for economic and social advancement.
Islands, deserts and other geographic settings in some regions of the
world likewise differ from islands, deserts and other geographic settings in
other regions, and so likewise present very different prospects for human
advancement. But while these and other geographic factors are important
influences, there is no geographic determinism. There are not only
prosperous nations with meager natural resources, and poor countries with
rich natural resources, some of the poorer countries have been so richly
endowed by nature as to provoke a whole literature claiming that there is a
curse of natural resources.10
Interactions of various geographic factors with each other, and with
non-geographic factors, including changing levels of human knowledge
over time, make outcomes very different from what they would be if
determined solely by a given geographic factor or even by geographic
factors as a whole.
The same geographic feature can play very different roles in different
periods of history, depending on interactions between particular geographic
features with changing human knowledge and technologies. Oceans, for
example were once major barriers to communication and transportation,
before the knowledge of science and the technology of navigation reached a
level where sailors could safely cross an ocean after which oceans vastly
expanded the cultural universe of peoples in distant lands, who could now
regularly communicate with each other and interact economically across
vast distances. Like many other advances, this increased the economic
disparities between those better able to take advantage of these advances,
such as people living in port cities versus people living in the hinterlands or
the mountains.
What geographic and other interactions mean more generally is that the
possible combinations and permutations of factors affecting economic and
social development are far more numerous than an enumeration of
individual factors would suggest. In turn this means that the probability that
all of these combinations and permutations would work out in such a way
as to produce even approximately equal economic outcomes around the
world is remote. Changing human knowledge over time, and varying
knowledge from place to place at a given time, mean that there has been
nothing resembling equal opportunities to become equally productive
among the tribal, racial or national groups that developed for thousands of
years in different parts of the world, and evolved their respective cultures in
different geographic settings with different opportunities and constraints.
The very land that people stand on is not the same in different places.
Highly fertile soils that scientists call Mollisols are neither evenly nor
randomly distributed around the world. Such soils are found almost
exclusively in the temperate zones of the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres, and are scattered very unevenly there, but are virtually nonexistent
in the tropics or in the arctic.11
This was especially important during the ages when agriculture was the
most prevalent and most important of human economic activities which
is to say, for many thousands of years, except for some more fortunate
regions within the most recent centuries. The economies and cultures that
evolved during those millennia did so within very different economic limits
in different geographic settings.
The economic effects of geographic differences are both direct,
affecting standards of living, and indirect, affecting the development of
peoples themselves, depending on whether a given geographic setting
facilitates or impedes their communication and interactions with the rest of
the human race. No society has had a monopoly on the discoveries and
inventions that have advanced human beings, so for a given set of people
whether a class, a race or a nation to be in touch with what other peoples
around the world are doing has been a major advantage, and to be isolated a
major disadvantage.
A larger cultural universe is important not simply because of the
products, technologies and knowledge that are transferred back and forth
important as these are but also, and perhaps more important, because
people seeing repeatedly how things have been done differently by others in
different places can break through the normal human inertia that keeps
people doing the same things in the same familiar ways, for generations or
even centuries, as happens in many geographically isolated societies.
When the Spaniards conquered the isolated Canary Islands in the
fifteenth century, they took over people of a Caucasian race, living much as
people had lived in the Stone Age.12 Similarly when the British discovered
the isolated Australian aborigines in the eighteenth century.13 In other
isolated settings as well, whether in distant mountain villages or deep in
tropical jungles, peoples have been found living as others had lived in
earlier centuries or millennia.14
Deserts are another geographic factor isolating peoples. The largest of
the worlds deserts by far is the Sahara Desert, which is a negative factor for
the peoples of North Africa but a devastating handicap for the peoples to
the south, black Africans in tropical, sub-Saharan Africa. This
incomparably vast desert slightly larger than the 48 contiguous states of
the United States15 has been for centuries the largest single factor
isolating the peoples of sub-Saharan Africa from the rest of the world. The
dearth of good harbors in tropical Africa16 also limited contacts with
overseas cultures. As Fernand Braudel put it, external influence filtered
only very slowly, drop by drop, into the vast African continent South of the
Sahara.17
Despite geographic influences, there can be no geographic determinism
because, where peoples are in touch with other peoples, even an unchanging
geographic setting interacts with changing human knowledge and differing
human cultures that have different values and aspirations, producing very
different economic and other outcomes at different times and places. Most
of what are natural resources for us today were not natural resources for the
cave man, who had not yet acquired the knowledge of how these things
could be used for his own purposes. There have been vast deposits of
petroleum in the Middle East from time immemorial. But it was only after
science and technology had advanced to a level which created industrial
nations elsewhere that the Middle Easts oil became a valuable asset,
profoundly changing life in both the Middle East and the industrial
countries.
Individual geographic influences cannot be considered in isolation,
since their interactions crucially affect outcomes. The relationship between
rainfall and soil is just one example of these interactions. Not only does the
amount of rainfall vary greatly from one place to another, so does the ability
of the soil to hold the water that rains down on it. This crucial ability to
hold water is much less in the limestone soils of the Balkans than in the
loess soils of northern China. Since climate and soil affect how well
different crops can be grown in different places, that has virtually precluded
equal prosperity in all regions of the world during the millennia when
agriculture was the most important economic activity around the world, and
the basis for the urban development of societies and peoples in different
parts of the world.
As with many other things, the ability of the soil to hold water is a
benefit only within some given range of variation. Back in Roman times,
the very flat lands of northwestern Europe, located in an area of plentiful
rainfall, resulted in many swamps and swampy places, which were major
impediments to agriculture. Only after centuries of development of drainage
techniques did much of this land get drained and become fertile.18 Fertility
is not always something inherent and immutable in a given soil. The
development of drainage and irrigation techniques, or of plows that can be
harnessed to horses or oxen to plow heavy soils, greatly affects their
fertility. It was the interaction of the soil, rainfall and changing human
knowledge and technology over time that made the soils of northwestern
Europe become fertile.
Europe was by no means the only place where the fertility of the soil
changed over the centuries or millennia. Roughly two thousand years ago,
the Loess Plateau in north-central China was an important agricultural
region, supplying grain, lumber and livestock to the country as a whole. But
today travelers in that same region can go for miles without seeing more
than a few scattered trees or some small, widely dispersed shrubs in a
seemingly endless panorama of barren yellow hills, gullies, and ravines.19
Such effects of deforestation have not been limited to China. Similar
consequences of accelerated erosion after massive removals of trees have
continued into the modern era in many other lands around the world, though
the United States has had a net gain of forest land.20 Such processes were
common around the ancient Mediterranean lands21 and have continued
there into more recent centuries:
Although incomplete and imperfect, the evidence for massive deforestation and
soil erosion in the mountains of the Mediterranean between 1800 and 1950 is
compelling. The timing and pace differed from place to place. The costs of
landscape change varied according to local geology and economies. In places it
worked to the advantage of lowland and coastal peoples, although more often it did
not. Nowhere did it work to the advantage of mountain people. Soil, fuel, timber,
even pasture grew more scarce or distant, and hard lives became harder.22
More generally, what all this means is that a given region of the world
cannot be automatically assumed to be the same geographic environment
over very long spans of time.
Because of the effect of sunlight in evaporating water, even places with
the same annual rainfall, and the same absorption of that rain water by the
land, can nevertheless have very different amounts of water in the soil to
nourish crops. Because lands bordering the Mediterranean Sea receive so
much more sunlight than in England, the evaporation of water is greater in
the Mediterranean. As a noted geographic treatise pointed out: An annual
rainfall of 23 inches, which maintains the fresh vegetation of southern
England with its mild moist summers, is inadequate at Jerusalem or
Palermo for garden or vineyard, which then require irrigation to maintain
growth.23
Not only have equal economic outcomes been rare to non-existent, the
particular patterns of inequality in one era have often differed greatly from
the particular patterns of inequality in another era. The vast superiority of
ancient Greek society to that in ancient Britain reflected Greeces
geographic advantage in being located near the Middle East, where
agriculture developed in ancient times and spread into nearby southeastern
Europe, centuries before it spread to all of Europe and beyond. Without
agriculture, it is difficult, if not virtually impossible, to have densely
populated urban societies, as distinguished from societies of wandering
hunters and gatherers, or shepherds all of whom require vast amounts of
land on which to roam, in order to get enough food to sustain a given
number of people.
To the present day, cities have remained the sources of much, if not
most, of the advancements in civilization. Far more of these advances, and
especially of landmark scientific and technological achievements, have
occurred among the populations of cities than among a similar number of
people living in other settings.24
Peoples without the geographic prerequisites for cities have long lagged
behind peoples in settings that facilitated urbanization. Cities developed
relatively late in the existence of the human species over scores of millennia
 and so did most of the advances in what we today recognize as
civilization. By making cities possible, agriculture made possible the great
industrial, medical and other advances that flourished in urban
environments.
Modern advances in transportation and communications can break
through the isolation of many peoples, just as other technological advances
can mitigate, or sometimes even eliminate, the current handicaps of various
other kinds of geographic impediments to economic and social
development. But what these historically recent advances cannot do is
retroactively erase the effects of thousands of years of different cultural
development that took place where there were serious geographic
restrictions, as compared to places inhabited by peoples with millennia of
experiences enriched by wider exposures to the achievements and ideas of
other peoples around the world.
How we define the concept of environment is crucial. One distinguished
geographers definition was, Environment is the total physical setting amid
which people live.25 But another geographer said, environment means
something more than local geographic conditions, and called for a larger
conception of environment,26 pointing out how the past experiences of
forebears have left their mark on the present race in the form of inherited
aptitudes and traditional customs acquired in those remote ancestral
habitats.27 Whether an environment is described geographically or
socioeconomically, the most fundamental distinction is between defining
environment as what is around a given people or defining environment to
include also what is within those people.
We cannot understand what is happening today without understanding
past conditions that shaped both the physical and mental worlds of people
living today, which are a legacy of the past, for better or worse. As one
cultural historian put it, men are not blank tablets upon which the
environment inscribes a culture which can readily be erased to make way
for a new inscription.28 As another noted historian put it: We do not live
in the past, but the past in us.29
W
Chapter 2
WAT E R WAY S
The fundamental reality of any civilization
must be its geographical cradle.
Fernand Braudel
aterways play many vital roles as sources of drinking water for
humans and animals, as sources of food such as fish and other
aquatic creatures, as sources of irrigation for crops and as arteries of
transportation for cargoes and people. In all these roles, waterways differ
from one another, in ways that can make them more valuable or less
valuable to humans. Put differently, they contribute to economic and other
inequalities.
Waterways obviously differ in kind from rivers to lakes, harbors and
seas and each kind in turn has its own internal differences, in navigability
for example. Rivers flowing gently across wide level plains, as in Western
Europe, are far more usable, for both commerce and the transportation of
people, than rivers plunging down from great heights through rapids,
cascades and waterfalls, as in much of sub-Saharan Africa. Indeed, the same
stream of water can differ at different places along its route to the sea:
A torrent that issues from its source in the mountains is not the river which
reaches the sea. On its long journey from highland to lowland it receives now the
milky waters of a glacier-fed stream, now a muddy tributary from agricultural
lands, now the clear waters from a limestone plateau, while all the time its racing
current bears a burden of soil torn from its own banks.1
Although the most indispensable role of waterways has been that of
providing drinking water for humans and animals, without which they
cannot survive, one of the most important roles of waterways for economic
development has been their role as transportation arteries. The crucial fact
about the role of waterways as transportation arteries for cargo and people
is the vast difference in cost between land transport and water transport,
which was even greater in the millennia before the advent of motorized land
transport, less than two centuries ago.
In 1830, for example, it cost more than 30 dollars to move a ton of
cargo 300 miles on land but only 10 dollars to ship it 3,000 miles across the
Atlantic Ocean.2 One consequence of such huge transportation cost
differentials was that people living in the city of Tiflis in the Caucasus, 340
miles from the Baku oil fields by land, bought oil imported from the United
States, 8,000 miles away by water.3 Similarly in mid-nineteenth century
America, before the transcontinental railroad was built, San Francisco could
be reached both faster and cheaper across the Pacific Ocean from a port in
China than it could be reached over land from the banks of the Missouri
River.4
Given the vast amounts of food, fuel and other necessities of life that
must be transported into cities, and the vast amounts of a citys output that
must be transported out to sell, there is no mystery why so many cities
around the world have been located on navigable waterways, especially
before the transportation revolutions within the past 200 years that produced
motorized transport on land. These cities include some located at the
terminus of great rivers that empty into the open seas (New York, London,
Shanghai, Rotterdam), some located beside huge lakes or inland seas
(Geneva, Chicago, Odessa, Detroit) and some located on great harbors
emptying into the open seas (Sydney, San Francisco, Tokyo, Rio de
Janeiro). Great inland cities like Paris have often been served by multiple
rivers. As French historian Fernand Braudel put it: Without the Seine,
Oise, Marne and Yonne, Paris would have had nothing to eat, drink or keep
warm by.5
Even after the creation of motorized land transport, the differential cost
of land transport and water transport did not disappear. In twentieth century
Africa, the estimated cost of shipping an automobile by land from Djibouti
to Addis Ababa (342 miles) was the same as the cost of shipping it by water
from Detroit to Djibouti (7,386 miles).6
Looked at differently, where there has been a lack of navigable
waterways, accessibility to the outside world has often been severely
limited, shrinking the cultural universe drastically and with it shrinking
the opportunities of peoples to connect with other peoples and cultures far
away. In some cases, a dearth of waterways and the presence of geographic
barriers meant that people living only 10 or 20 miles from each other often
had very little contact. This was especially so in places lacking horses,
camels or other beasts of burden, during the many centuries before modern
transportation and communications developed.
One of the remarkable facts about the continent of Africa is that,
although Africa is more than twice the size of Europe, the African coastline
is shorter than the European coastline.7 This is possible only because the
European coastline twists and turns, creating many harbors where ships can
dock, sheltered from the rough waters of the open seas. Moreover, the
coastline of Europe is increased by the many islands and peninsulas that
make up more than one-third of that continents total land area.
By contrast, the African coastline is smooth, with few substantial
indentations, few good natural harbors, and fewer islands and peninsulas
which make up only 2 percent of Africas land area. The ratio of Europes
coastline to its area is four times that of Africa.8 Moreover, the coastal
waters around sub-Saharan Africa are often too shallow for ocean-going
ships to dock.9 In such places, large ocean-going ships must anchor
offshore, and have their cargoes unloaded onto smaller vessels that can
operate in shallow waters. But this time-consuming process, and the greater
amount of labor and equipment required, has been more costly often
prohibitively costly. For centuries, seaborne commerce between Europe and
Asia sailed around Africa, and seldom stopped.
Even in those few places where large ships can enter Africa on deep
rivers, tropical Africas coasts have narrow coastal plains that often end
abruptly against escarpments.10 One important consequence of this shape of
the land is that, even in places where ships can enter the continent on
African rivers, they can seldom get very far inland before being confronted
with cascades and waterfalls. For the same reason, boats coming from the
vast interior of the continent are seldom able to continue out to the open
sea, as boats and even large ships can do in various places on the
Eurasian landmass or in parts of the Western Hemisphere.
By contrast with Africa, China has had a huge network of navigable
waterways, described as unique in the world, formed by the Yangtze
River and its tributaries, as well as an indented coastline, full of harbors.11
What was also unique were the centuries during which China was the most
advanced nation in the world, on into what were called the Middle Ages in
Europe.
RIVERS
It was not just in harbors, but also in rivers, that Chinas waterways
have contrasted with those in Africa. Africa is a relatively dry continent,
with many of its rivers not deep enough to carry the large ships with heavy
loads that are carried on the rivers of China, Western Europe or the United
States. Even the Nile was unable to carry the largest ships in the days of the
Roman Empire,12 much less the even larger ships of today.
The average depth of a river is not as important as its minimum depth
on the route of a given vessels journey, which is what determines how far a
boat or ship of a given size and weight can go. The same word
navigable may be applied to many very different waterways, but with
very different meanings in specific, concrete circumstances. Although we
may legitimately speak, in general terms, of the conditions of waterways or
other geographic features of a particular country, it is always with the
caveat that those conditions do not necessarily prevail uniformly throughout
that country or throughout particular regions within that country.
Geographic equality seldom prevails at either a local, national or
international level.
Even in North America, with its many long and large rivers, there have
been in the dryer western plains of the United States waterways navigable
only in rare, short periods, and only for canoes or very shallow flatboats.13
In the eastern United States as well, the Mohawk River, which was
navigable for birch canoes that carried furs for commerce in the early days
of the country, turned out to be inadequate for carrying the heavy guns used
in the War of 1812.14 The Cumberland River was beset with reefs, sand bars
and snags, and sometimes had long interruptions of navigation, due to
changing depths of its water in different seasons.15
Man-made interventions on American rivers, as on rivers in other parts
of the world, have taken various forms, including building locks and dams
or dredging, but these interventions have been by no means equally
provided, because some communities, regions or states have been more able
to pay for such things and some circumstances justified the expense while
others did not. In the mountains of Kentucky, even in the early twentieth
century, there were few bridges for vehicles, though foot bridges were more
common.16 Therefore it was often necessary for travelers to ford rivers,17
something that Thomas Jefferson had complained about in Virginia, more
than a century earlier.18
Waterways, like other geographic features were, in millennia past, more
or less facts of life to which human beings had to adjust as best they could.
Yet, with the growth and development of human knowledge, many of these
geographic features could be altered to varying degrees and at varying costs
 which were not necessarily equal in all parts of the world, nor equally
affordable to peoples with widely varying wealth.
In some places canals could be built, connecting rivers, and in other
places such as Suez or Panama canals could be built connecting seas or
oceans, with major economic and military impacts. Harbors could be
dredged. On land, mountains could be drilled into, to provide tunnels for
railroads and, later, automobile traffic. And of course eventually airplanes
could soar over the most formidable mountain barriers that had dominated
the economic and social life of peoples since time immemorial. But, like the
geographic features they affected, these man-made factors were seldom
even approximately equal in their consequences for different peoples in
different parts of the world. Nor were the inequalities of one era the same in
their consequences in later eras, as growing human knowledge led to new
changes, which inevitably affected the existing natural and man-made
environments.
Although Canadas St. Lawrence Seaway is navigable by ocean-going
ships, all the way into the Great Lakes, that does not mean that it is
navigable by all ocean-going ships. When major, man-made improvements
were made to the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1959, and for many years
thereafter, it was navigable by most of the ocean-going ships in the world at
that time but, as ocean-going ships grew larger and larger over the years,
today it is no longer navigable by most ocean-going ships, though it is still
navigable by many.19
The Zambezi River in Africa has highly variable depths from place to
place and from rainy season to dry season. In some times and places the
Zambezi is barely navigable by boats requiring just 3 feet of water, though
at other times and places the water level is 20 feet deeper.20 Some rivers in
Angola can support boats requiring no more than 8 feet of water.21 During
the dry season, even a major West African river like the Niger can carry
barges weighing no more than 12 tons in some places.22 But, in China,
ships weighing 10,000 tons have been able to go hundreds of miles up the
Yangtze River, and smaller vessels another thousand miles beyond that.23
Rivers in tropical Africa are seldom continuously navigable for any
such distances, even when these rivers have ample water. In terms of the
contours of the land, sub-Saharan Africa has been characterized as cursed
with a mesa form which converts nearly every river into a plunging torrent
on its approach to the sea.24 Most of tropical Africa is more than 1,000 feet
above sea level and much of it is more than 2,000 feet above sea level. Thus
the Zaire River begins at an altitude of 4,700 feet and so must come down
that vertical distance before flowing out into the Atlantic Ocean, creating
rapids, cascades and waterfalls on the way. Although the Zaire has more
water than the Mississippi, the Yangtze or the Rhine, that does not make it
the equivalent of these and other major commercial waterways elsewhere,
because the Zaires many plunges interrupt its navigability, though it may
carry extensive inland traffic for various distances on level stretches. This
pattern is common among the rivers of sub-Saharan Africa.
Another pattern that is common in parts of tropical Africa is a wide
fluctuation in the water level of its rivers, due to highly varying rainfall
amounts in different seasons. Unlike Western Europe, where the rain falls
more or less evenly throughout the year,25 except on the Iberian peninsula,
rainfall patterns in parts of sub-Saharan Africa include long periods when
there is no rain at all, followed by torrential downpours during rainy
seasons.26 Because of such seasonal rainfall patterns, the Niger Rivers
chief tributary, the Benue River, has in places been navigable only two
months of the year. This has led to a hectic shipping pattern:
If they let the craft stay up the Benue a day too long, the vessels will be stuck on
sandbanks for ten months! Yet if through caution or misinformation they withdraw
the fleet too soon, much valuable merchandise is left behind and can only be
evacuated by land at much greater cost. . . The first boats to go in are the
commercial canoes, then follow the larger craft, and finally, when there is sufficient
water at Lokoja, the largest power-craft and their barges sail up the river as fast as
possible. Towards the end of the short season, the large craft have to come out first
because of the fall in the level of the water; the medium-sized craft follow, and the
small canoes may continue for some time evacuating small quantities of produce.27
Statistics on how many miles of navigable rivers there are in Africa, or
anywhere else, can be very misleading when these are not continuous miles
that a vessel of a given size and weight can travel before encountering water
too shallow to support it, or encountering cascades or waterfalls that stop all
vessels. Sometimes a canoe can go ashore and be emptied of its cargo
before reaching a waterfall, with both the canoe and the cargo then being
carried around the waterfall, so that the reloaded canoe can proceed on
another level stretch of water. However, this is both a time-consuming
and therefore expensive process, and one that limits the size of both the
canoe and its cargo. The net result is that only a cargo that is very valuable
in proportion to its size and weight is economically feasible to transport for
any considerable distance in such places.
By contrast, in other parts of the world, where rivers are continuously
navigable for hundreds of miles across level plains, as in various places on
the Eurasian landmass or in the Western Hemisphere, bulky cargoes with
relatively low value in proportion to their size and weight wood, coal or
wheat, for example may be economically viable to transport long
distances by water.
Even within the same continent, Western Europes rivers have been very
different from the rivers in Eastern Europe or Southern Europe, as well as
radically different from the rivers of sub-Saharan Africa. A broad coastal
plain, where the land nowhere reaches 1,000 feet above sea level, means
that Western Europe has had slow-flowing rivers, which were especially
valuable in the long ages before power boats could readily go against the
flow of swift-moving currents. Western Europes rivers often lead out into
the open seas, providing access to seaports around the world. But most
rivers in Eastern Europe and Southern Europe are quite different, in ways
that affect both economic activity and the size of the cultural universe
available to the peoples living in the regions through which these rivers
flow. Because the warming effect of the Gulf Stream on the climate of
Western Europe is lessened the farther east one goes, the waterways of
Eastern Europe are frozen more often, and longer, in the winters.
Even when the rivers of Eastern Europe are flowing, often they are
flowing into lakes or inland seas, rather than out into the open seas that
connect with the rest of the world. The waters of the Danube, the Don and
the Dnieper flow into the Black Sea, for example, and the waters of the
Volga flow into the Caspian Sea. But most of the water in Russian rivers
flows into the Arctic Ocean, which is hardly as accessible to the rest of the
world as are the Atlantic or the Pacific. These differences in waterways are
among the many reasons why Eastern Europe has lagged economically
behind Western Europe for centuries.
The rivers of Southern Europe have contributed even less to the
economic development of that region. Partly this is because there are fewer
major rivers in this region than in Western Europe or Eastern Europe, and
partly because the climate in the lands of Mediterranean Europe is one with
torrential downpours in winter and very little rain in the summer, when
rivers almost dry up28 under the relentless Mediterranean sunshine in that
season. Similar climates in other parts of the world, such as coastal
California or southwestern Australia, have been referred to as
Mediterranean climates.29 However, even within the Mediterranean
region itself, there are variations with the summer being drier in the
eastern Mediterranean, and drier in the southern lands than in the north.
Going from west to east, the rainfall in Rome from June through
September is less than the rainfall in Barcelona during those same summer
months, and the summer rainfall in Athens is less than one-third the
summer rainfall in Rome.30 Going from south to north, the summer rainfall
patterns in the Mediterranean become more similar to those in the rest of
Europe, and that obviously affects the rivers. Milan, in northern Italy, has
more than twice as much rainfall from June through September as Rome31
 a fact that is even more consequential for the agricultural countrysides
near these cities than in the cities themselves. Given these rainfall patterns,
the Po River in northern Italy is exceptional among rivers in the
Mediterranean region in having an ample volume of water throughout the
year, since the Po receives water from both summer rains and from melting
snows in the mountains. It is also exceptional in terms of the length over
which it is navigable, as it flows gently through level plains.32
Not surprisingly, the Po River valley, extending from Turin to Venice,
has long been one of the more prosperous regions in Italy. Northern Italy in
general has for centuries been more prosperous, more educated and more
technologically advanced than southern Italy. Most of the great,
internationally recognized cultural achievements of Italy from Galileo,
Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci, for example have come from the
north. Location, as well as waterways, contributed to the advantages of
northern Italy, since the northern part of the country has been in closer
touch with the cultures of Western Europe.
Topography also affects rivers. In Spain, even some rivers that flow year
round have had only short navigable stretches, due to the contours of the
land.33 In the mountainous Balkans, rivers often flow too steeply to be
navigable, except for some that are locally navigable by small boats and
rafts.34 In places where rainfall is very scarce, dew can become a significant
source of water, as in the Mediterranean highlands.35 Exceptionally sharp
differences in temperature between day and night mean that the water
absorption capacity of the air during the day can greatly exceed its capacity
at night, causing heavy dew to form overnight, providing enough water to
enable some vegetation to survive where it could not survive if it were
solely dependent on rainfall.
In the Western Hemisphere, the United States has had huge geographic
advantages in its waterways, as in other ways a well-indented coastline
punctuated by superb harbors, in the words of distinguished economic
historian David S. Landes,36 and large rivers, of which the Mississippi is the
most prominent. In contrast to the plunging waters of many African rivers
 more than thirty cataracts, falling a total of nearly a thousand feet in a
distance of 150 miles on the Zaire River37 the river bed of the Mississippi
slopes downward at a rate of about 4 inches per mile.38
Although the Nile is the longest river in the world, the Mississippi pours
many times as much water into the Gulf of Mexico as the Nile pours into
the Mediterranean.39 Water is what rivers are all about, and the Mississippi
has far more of it than the Nile, even though the smaller amount of water in
the Nile is stretched out over a longer distance. Africas rivers may be more
picturesque, with their cascades and waterfalls, but they provide nothing
like the transportation and communications scope of rivers that flow more
gently across level plains in various other parts of the world.
In contrast to the limited ability of the Nile to carry large ships, the
Hudson River and the harbors at San Francisco and San Diego are all deep
enough for aircraft carriers to dock right up against the land. The Great
Lakes are a vast system of connected waterways, of which Lake Michigan
alone is larger than the nation of Israel, and Lake Superior is larger than
Lake Michigan. These lakes are also deep enough to handle many oceangoing
ships, as they have been since 1959, when man-made improvements
to the St. Lawrence River allowed such ships to extend their journeys from
the Atlantic Ocean all the way to Chicago and other midwestern cities
located on the shores of the Great Lakes.
As a noted geographer put it:
No other equally large area of the earth is so generously equipped by nature for
the production and distribution of the articles of commerce as southern Canada and
that part of the United States lying east of the Rocky Mountains. The simple build
of the North American continent, consisting of a broad central trough between
distant mountain ranges, and characterized by gentle slopes to the Atlantic Ocean
and the Gulf of Mexico, has generated great and small rivers with easy-going
currents, that everywhere opened up the land to explorer, trader and settler.40
Neither with waterways nor with other geographic features can a given
geographic setting be assumed to be unchanging over time, nor changing
equally in different parts of the world at the same time. Many rivers, for
example, were for millennia one-way arteries of traffic. In many places
during that long era, logs for example could be floated down a river, even
when the only way for people in charge of those logs to return home was by
land. Sometimes, however, when people traveled by boat and where a
prevailing wind blew in the opposite direction from the rivers current, it
could be possible to raise sails and take the boat back upriver, if the current
was not too strong. Similarly when the river flow was sufficiently slow and
gentle that one could row a small vessel against the current. In Kentucky,
for example, flatboats equipped with oars could go upstream on some
rivers.41 But a more common situation, for many centuries, was one in
which there was only one-way traffic on rivers. In ancient times, traffic on
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers was exclusively downstream,42 as was to
continue to be the case for many other rivers around the world for many
centuries thereafter.
The decisive change for river traffic came with the invention of the
steamboat in the early nineteenth century. It changed the Mississippi River
from a one-way artery of traffic to one in which, after 1815, a steamboat
could go back upriver from New Orleans to Louisville.43 This technological
advance essentially doubled the transportation capacity of many rivers, by
allowing personal travel and commercial traffic in both directions. But this
revolutionary development came first to places that could afford steamboats
and where the value of river traffic justified the expense. As late as the early
twentieth century, most of the traffic on rivers in eastern Siberia was still
downstream traffic.44 Here, as in many other contexts, outcomes depended
upon interactions of various geographic and non-geographic factors in
this case, river currents, wind currents, changing technology and differing
economic circumstances.
These interactions of waterways with other geographic and nongeographic
factors were also important, even aside from technological
changes. South Americas Amazon River, for example, is by far the most
physically impressive of the worlds rivers, in terms of its volume of water
 by far the largest of any river in the world its navigability a and its
length, which is nearly the same as that of the Nile, while the Amazon
empties dozens of times more water into the Atlantic than the Nile empties
into the Mediterranean. The Amazon also empties several times as much
water as the Mississippi empties into the Gulf of Mexico.45 Indeed, onefifth
of all the fresh water that enters all the oceans of the world comes from
the Amazon River as it empties into the Atlantic.46
Nevertheless, the region through which the Amazon flows, with its
jungles and poor quality soils, has had no such economic development as
would make the Amazon at all comparable, as an artery of commerce, to the
Mississippi, the Rhine, the Danube or other rivers that, put together, do not
have as much water as the Amazon has. Conversely, a very modest-sized
river like the Thames, less than 10 percent as long as the Amazon, has
played a major economic role as the shipping outlet for a region of thriving
industry and commerce in England. b In Russia, the Yenisey and the Lena
rivers each have more than twice as much water as the Volga, but it is the
Volga that carries more shipping tonnage than any other Russian river,
because it flows through regions containing most of the nations population
and most of its industry and farmland.
What these differences between waterways, and within a given kind of
waterway, mean for their human consequences is that the possible
combinations and permutations of the factors that make them useful to
humans are so numerous as to make equal values of waterways to human
beings located in different parts of the world very unlikely, quite aside from
the fact that waterways are more available in some regions of the world
than in others, and are virtually non-existent in deserts.
OCEANS
Rivers are not the only waterways whose economic roles can change
over time, with changing human knowledge and technology. Oceans are
perhaps an even more striking example. Oceans were once major barriers to
communication and transportation. The Mediterranean Sea was for
centuries a more inviting waterway than the Atlantic Ocean, for travel and
trade, before there were later advances in knowledge, because of the greater
ease of navigating around the Mediterranean:
The long summer of cloudless days and starry nights, of steady winds and fogless
atmosphere provided a favorable season for sailing, when the strong diurnal breezes
favored the out-going and home-coming ships, and the countless promontories and
mountainous islands, visible in the lucid air, furnished points to steer by before the
invention of the compass.47
Although sailors could not see all the way across from one shore of the
Mediterranean to the opposite shore, they could usually see from one island
to another, and thus could make their way past many familiar landmarks on
their way from shore to shore. But this was obviously not a process that
could be used in most places to get across the vast Atlantic Ocean or the
even more vast Pacific.
Oceans changed from being transportation barriers to being
transportation avenues only after humans learned how to navigate where
there were no landmarks to follow, but simply water to be seen in all
directions, all the way out to the horizon. Navigation on the oceans became
possible only after science, mathematics and technology had developed
sufficiently to overcome this fundamental handicap. This was done first
through various ways of navigating by using the position of the sun in the
sky during the day and the positions of stars at night, providing as it were,
landmarks in the sky by which to determine directions on the ocean.
Eventually, and decisively, navigating the oceans became far less
complicated and more reliable with the development of the magnetic
compass, which could be used more readily, and even when clouds
obscured the sky. This ability to cross oceans, not simply as a few bold
explorers did but as a routine matter of commerce, vastly expanded the
cultural universe of peoples in distant lands.
Seaports around the gentle waters of the Mediterranean were for
centuries more busy than seaports on the more turbulent Atlantic coast of
Europe, c before Europeans discovered the Western Hemisphere. This
discovery changed the main direction of Europes international trade,
however.
Because different kinds of ships were required to handle the very
different rough waters of the Atlantic, the leading commercial and naval
powers of the Mediterranean were eclipsed by the leading commercial and
naval powers of the Atlantic, who had ships better adapted for the new
transatlantic commerce. Where Italians had been leaders in such things as
ship design and navigation when Europes international trade centered in
the Mediterranean, the Portuguese, the Dutch and the Flemish took the lead
in seafaring technologies and skills when Europes international trade faced
the very different challenges of crossing the Atlantic.48 The seas had not
changed, but their economic and other significance had, with the advance of
knowledge and technology.
Despite the crucial importance of agriculture as a source of a
dependable food supply for a concentrated and sedentary population,
fishing has been another source, and one available in regions where
agriculture has not been sufficiently productive to sustain human life by
itself. This has been especially important in very cold climates, but
communities of fishermen have also been common in the Amazon jungles
of South America and in sub-Saharan Africa.49 In tropical lands where the
fertility of the soil is often poor, agriculture may not be sufficiently
productive to support the population by itself. Fishing villages represent a
step upward from a hunter-gathering society toward a sedentary life, even
though these villages may not represent the same degree of population
concentration as cities fed by agriculture.
In other climates as well, fishing can be a major economic activity. It
was said at one time that Amsterdam was built on herring,50 and fishing has
also been important to the economy of Japan, among other places.
Commercial fishing can supply a market reaching far beyond the local area,
as in New England, where a name like Cape Cod provides a clue to its
history.51 In some of the lands around the Mediterranean, the soil yields so
little in agriculture that many peoples have had to piece together a
livelihood by combining the products of both the land and the sea, as others
in that region have by combining agriculture with shepherding animals.52
Fishing opportunities, however, are no more evenly distributed around
the world than other opportunities. A long continental shelf reaching out
into the Atlantic Ocean creates an underwater environment where fish and
other marine life can flourish.53 But the land is shaped differently around
and under the Mediterranean Sea, which lacks the shallow shelves of the
Atlantic.54
As a result, while there has long been fishing in the Mediterranean, it
has not been comparable to the rich fishing regions that attract commercial
fishing vessels great distances out into the Atlantic waters near
Newfoundland and Iceland, or into the North Sea fishing regions.55 The net
result in the early twentieth century was that an Italian fishermans earnings
averaged about one-fourth the earnings of a French fisherman and oneeighth
those of an English fisherman. Nor was this due to differences in the
price of fish, which was no higher in France or England than in Italy.56 It
was just that far more fish could be caught in a given time in the North
Atlantic than in the Mediterranean.
a If the Amazon flowed through North America, an ocean freighter could sail from Boston to
Denver, Jonathan B. Tourtellot, The Amazon: Sailing A Jungle Sea, Great Rivers of the World,
edited by Margaret Sedeen (Washington: National Geographic Society, 1984), p. 299.
b As far back as the eighteenth century, the Thames was said to have a forest of masts, with more
than 13,000 ships there in 1798. Fernand Braudel, The Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of
the Possible, translated by Sin Reynolds (New York: Harper & Row, 1981), p. 548.
c It is understandable that Europeans, used to the Atlantic Ocean, named the new ocean they
discovered in the Western Hemisphere the Pacific Ocean. The Atlantic was far from being pacific.
L
Chapter 3
L A N D S
The land on which we live has always shaped us. It has shaped the
wars, the power, politics, and social development of the peoples that
now inhabit nearly every part of the earth.
Tim Marshall
and has many aspects. The simple fact of the shape of the land
determines how water will flow. This has major implications for the
creation and characteristics of streams, rivers and lakes, which in turn have
implications for the fate of people living in a given region.
Another way the lay of the land can have important effects is by
whether it spreads from east to west, like the great Eurasian landmass, or
from north to south like the continents in the Western Hemisphere,
stretching from North America to South America. The east-west orientation
of the Eurasian landmass means that most of Europe and Asia are at similar
latitudes in the temperate zone, so that similar crops and natural vegetation
can grow in both places, and similar animals have natural habitats in both
places. This in turn means that agricultural knowledge, as well as
knowledge of animal husbandry and knowledge of both vegetation and
meats, can transfer between Europe and Asia. In short, this ability to
interchange knowledge that is applicable in both places means that, for
centuries, Europe and Asia have had a larger cultural universe than places
separated by similar distances in a north-south direction, which create
greater climatic differences. Knowledge of agriculture in Canada may not
be as applicable in tropical Panama.
In the Western Hemisphere, the peoples of the temperate zones of North
America and South America can have similar climates, but they have been
separated from each other by the vast area of the tropics between them
and the tropics have very different flora and fauna from that in either of the
two temperate zones. Therefore knowledge would not pass as readily and
continuously through the tropics, where such knowledge would have more
limited applicability, if any applicability at all, given the different flora and
fauna in the tropics. In short, north-south distances entail climate
differences, more so than east-west distances do, making knowledge
transfers less likely and less applicable, because knowledge of nature is less
applicable in different climate settings.
Spaghetti could originate in China and yet become a favorite food in
Italy, because its natural ingredients can be grown in both places, as a result
of the east-west spread of the Eurasian landmass, which produces somewhat
similar climates. But the Iroquois of North America were not likely to learn
of any food used by the Incas of South America, not only because of
transportation limitations in pre-Columbus times, but also because the
north-south spread of the lands in the Western Hemisphere means that there
is a large tropical region between the temperate zones of North America and
South America.
Unlike spaghetti which went thousands of miles from China to Italy
 the potato, which grew in the Andean highlands of South America, never
reached even the Mexican highlands in North America.1
Differences in the physical and chemical composition of the soil are
another factor that is crucial for agriculture, as is climate. Special features
of the land, such as mountains, deserts and rift valleys, can fragment a
population and isolate the fragments from each other. The mountains of the
Balkans have helped make Balkanization a synonym for the
fragmentation of peoples. But this was not unique to the Balkans. As was
said of the Scottish highlands in times past:
Upon the development of Scotland the great hills exercised a controlling
influence. By their very existence they tended to produce two different kinds of
society in the country, one of the hills and the other of the plains; and by impeding
communication, they tended to break the population up into self-sufficing units,
great or small.2
It was much the same story in the mountainous regions of Kentucky, of
which a geographic study noted, the Kentucky Mountains, in common
with many other areas of similar topography, have served to isolate the
inhabitants and retard development and progress3 this continued
isolation resulting in a distinct group of people possessing the speech,
customs and manner of life of a bygone day,4 with the agricultural
economy of colonial days, almost unmodified.5 Such fragmentation and
isolation of the fragments have also been the fate of much of sub-Saharan
Africa where rift valleys, limited navigability of waterways and a dearth of
animals for transportation led to results similar to those of mountain
communities in many countries around the world.
Mountains
Mountains affect both the lives of people living in those mountains and
the lives of people living on the land below and it affects these two sets
of people very differently.
As already noted, about 10 to 12 percent of the worlds population lives
in mountains, about half in Asia, and about 90 percent live no higher in the
mountains than 2,500 meters or 8,200 feet. Population density in mountains
is usually relatively low.6 Certain common patterns have appeared in the
lives of people living in various mountain communities around the world.
The most common of these patterns have included poverty, isolation and
backwardness.7 As a noted geographer put it, human advancement
slackens its pace in the foothills and comes to a halt in the mountains.8
Nor is it hard to see why. The very nature of mountains long denied many
of the people living there many of the things that promote prosperity and
connection with the general progress in the rest of the world.
Fertile land can seldom be found in abundance on mountainsides, where
soil is readily washed away by rain, though some of this soil collects down
in mountain valleys, while the rest of it is washed away down into the
lowlands. People tend to gather in the flat areas of land in the valleys amid
the mountains, since this is where crops can be grown most readily. But
mountain valleys are often isolated from each other, with the population
being as scattered as the flat lands they occupy, as was said of mountain
communities in the Southern mountains in the United States,9 though the
same pattern has existed elsewhere around the world. The amount of usable
soil in each valley tends to limit the number of people who can be fed there,
so that small villages have often been the norm. These villages may be
isolated from each other, as well as being isolated from the outside world
beyond the mountains, even when these villages are not far from each other
as the crow flies, but are not very accessible across rugged mountain
terrain.10
These historic handicaps were especially severe during the millennia
before modern transportation and communications technologies were
created. However, these technological advances have almost invariably
originated outside the mountains themselves, and the extent to which they
have been adopted in the mountains has varied with local geographic and
economic conditions. Moreover, even where these advances have been
adopted extensively, that cannot readily undo all the cultural effects of
previous centuries of cultural isolation.
Navigable waterways are often lacking in mountain terrain, where the
steepness of the land can make for rapids, cascades and waterfalls. So this
means of transportation and communication has often been denied to people
in many mountain communities, such as in the Balkans.11 Land
transportation is also likely to be difficult, especially where the rugged
terrain is inhospitable to wheeled vehicles, so that travel on foot is the only
feasible way to get around in many places. Historian Fernand Braudel
pointed out that in 1881 the wheeled vehicle was still unknown in
Morocco.12 As another scholar said of people in the Rif Mountains of
Morocco, The Rifians are great walkers and they have to be.13 In other
mountain communities around the world, transport options have been so
limited that travelers and tourists have had to employ mountain people as
human carriers, substituting for pack animals or wheeled vehicles to carry
their equipment and supplies.14
Although such patterns may be general, there are also exceptions. Parts
of the Himalayas and the Andes, for example, have fertile and well-watered
land.15 The Alps have numerous mountain passes16 broad enough to
accommodate much commercial traffic and, in ancient times, Hannibals
army with its elephants. The Alps include passes whose elevation is low
enough to avoid being closed by heavy snowfall most of the year, as the
passes at higher elevations in the Caucasus Mountains are.17 In short,
various mountains around the world have different geographic layouts that
determine to what extent there are level valleys with large enough areas of
fertile land to support sizeable communities and mountain passes numerous
enough, level enough and broad enough to provide ready access to other
mountain communities and to the outside world.18 Even mountains in the
same country and the same region can differ in ways that make a difference
to human beings. For example:
The mouth of the Shenandoah Valley was broad, and it and the larger Valley of
Virginia of which it was a part contained gently rolling, fertile land that contrasted
sharply with the rough topography of the Alleghenies.19
In the millennia before modern transport arose, the particular
topography of particular mountains affected the size of the communities
that could be fed in particular valleys, their accessibility to each other and to
the outside world which is to say, the size of their cultural universe
their opportunities for commercial relations and the degree to which these
communities were militarily defensible. Even after the rise of such modern
developments as railroads, automobiles and electricity, the geographic
layout of particular mountains determined to what extent these and other
modern features were economically viable in those mountains.
Building roads not to mention water systems, sewage systems, or
electric power systems can be extremely expensive where isolated and
thinly populated mountain communities mean very high costs per capita for
creating such infrastructure. In Italys Apennines Mountains, as late as
1860, there were no roads whatever in 91 out of 123 Lucanian villages.20
Even in the twentieth century, there were places in the Pindus Mountains of
Greece more accessible to mules and to people on foot than to wheeled
vehicles, and one village acquired electricity as late as 1956.21
In 1922, the Kentucky mountains had a trifle over one mile of road for
every square mile of area, and the quality of these roads was as meager as
their quantity. These mountain roads were narrow and in places hardly
wide enough for a single wagon, and in few places wide enough so that two
vehicles can pass.22 The roadbeds were not capable of supporting vehicles
with loads, except during the summer and early fall, when they were likely
to be drier, but even then the difficulties were such that it was not
uncommon to see two teams of horses pulling a small wagon23 obviously
a very expensive form of transportation. Railroads brought more knowledge
of the outside world into the Kentucky mountains, but railroad construction
did not begin until 1856 and nearly all the railroads existing there in the
1920s had been constructed since 1885.24
A study of mountains around the Mediterranean in the late twentieth
century noted, Only a few roads penetrate the Pindus today, and most of
those are of recent construction. The great majority are unpaved.25
Substandard infrastructure remains common in mountains around the world,
even in the twenty-first century.26 However, modern transportation and
communications technologies are making inroads into the isolation of many
mountain communities,27 though with great differences among different
regions of the world. Switzerland, for example, has more than 20 times as
many miles of roads per capita as in Ethiopia.28 Differences in man-made
infrastructure are as great as other environmental inequalities.
Distinguished American scholar Edward C. Banfields classic account
of an Italian mountain village where he lived in 1954 and 1955, The Moral
Basis of a Backward Society, noted that there was only one telephone in
town. In this community of 3,400 people, to which he gave the pseudonym
Montegrano, there were five automobiles for hire but no one owned a
private car. Most of the people were poor farmers and laborers. One-third of
the men and two-thirds of the women could neither read nor write, and
some peasants had never gone beyond the next village, just four miles
away.29 When they traveled, they seldom used a cart, much less a car, to
transport the belongings they took with them. As Professor Banfield noted:
When the farm people of Montegrano travel, it is on foot leading a donkey to the
sides of which large baskets are fixed . . . The range of travel, then, is limited to
nearby towns. Many people have never travelled beyond these neighboring towns
and some women have never left Montegrano.30
It was not only infrastructure and technological advances that reached
mountain communities belatedly. So did cultures prevailing on the lands
below. Although Islam has for centuries been the prevailing religion and
culture of the Middle East and North Africa, a different religion and culture
continued to prevail in the neighboring mountainous regions of Armenia
and Abyssinia. And though people in the Rif Mountains of Morocco
eventually adopted Islam, this was centuries after the people on the land
below had already become Muslims.31
In language as well, Gaelic continued to survive in the Scottish
highlands, long after the Scottish lowlanders were speaking English, and the
Vlach language survived in the Pindus Mountains of Greece, centuries after
people on the land below were speaking Greek.32 Language differences
have added to the sources of isolation and fragmentation of mountain
people, especially when the languages or dialects spoken in the mountains
were unknown in most of the outside world. Moreover, where mountain
villages were isolated from each other for centuries, they often developed
languages that were different from each other, as well as different from the
language of the world beyond the mountains. A multiplicity of languages
and dialects has been common in isolated mountain communities around the
world.33 Of the more than one thousand languages in New Guinea, more
than 70 percent originate in the mountainous regions, which cover only onethird
of the island.34
Law and order are yet another part of the social infrastructure that has
been harder to establish and maintain in many mountain regions. Even
mountainous regions nominally under the control of a nation or empire have
not always or in all places been effectively under such control. Examples
include the mountains of Montenegro under the Ottoman Empire, the Rif
Mountains under Moroccan sultans, and the uplands of India under the
Mughal rulers.35 Both the Scottish highlands and the highlands of colonial
Ceylon remained independent for many years after their respective nearby
lowlands were conquered and incorporated into another cultural universe. In
centuries past, it was common in many mountain regions around the world
for highland peoples to raid and plunder peoples living in the lowlands.36
Poverty in many mountain communities long exceeded anything known
as poverty in most other settings. As Professor Banfield said of the Italian
mountain village in which he lived in 1954 and 1955:
Most people in Montegrano are desperately poor. Many have nothing to eat but
bread, and not enough of that. Even the well-to-do are poor by American standards.
Such a town cannot support a newspaper or the kinds of activity which a newspaper
would report.37
Such poverty and desolation in the mountains were not unique to this
Italian village. A twentieth century Oxford scholar in Greece said, I have
met a Greek, brought up in this century in a mountain village, who had
never seen an olive (or a fish or an orange) until he was 12 years old.38 An
early twentieth century geographer likewise referred to the barren
highlands of Central Asia where nature dispensed her gifts with a miserly
hand.39
In various mountains in countries around the Mediterranean, it was long
common in the past for peasants to rarely eat meat, and even cheese was
largely confined to a few fortunately situated villages.40 Bread was the
common food for peasants in all three meals of the day. In earlier times,
women made clothes for their families, and mountain people with animals
brought those animals inside in cold weather. As a well-known history of
Western civilization put it: Only the most prosperous had wooden dividers
separating the human from animal quarters.41 A traveler through the
Bulgarian mountains in 1574 said that he preferred to sleep outdoors, under
a tree, rather than in mountain peasants huts, where animals and people
lived together in such filth that we could not bear the stench.42
These broad generalizations do not, of course, apply to every mountain
community everywhere. But the general pattern has been all too common in
all too many mountains and highlands around the world, especially in
centuries past. Even in prosperous America, in the early twentieth century, a
sample of farmers in North Carolina showed that those located on the
coastal plains earned three to five times the income of farmers in mountain
counties.43 A twentieth century study of a village in the Himalayas found
that 20 percent of newborn babies died before they were a year old.44
An Appalachian county in Kentucky was called a pauper county in
the 1890s, and was still in 2010 one of the poorest counties in the United
States.45 The life expectancy of men in that county in 2010 was less than
the life expectancy of men in Fairfax County, Virginia, by more than a
decade. Womens life expectancy in that same Kentucky county had
actually declined slightly over a period of 20 years. The population of this
county, incidentally, was 98.5 percent white.46 Both foreigners and blacks
have long been rare in the Kentucky mountains.47
Even in the early twenty-first century, most of the mountain peoples in
the world still practiced subsistence agriculture,48 as distinguished from
raising crops to sell. The negative economic consequences of mountain life
have been accompanied by broader negative human consequences. In many
mountain communities around the world, especially in times past, the
struggle for existence caused children to have to work at an early age,
curtailing their education,49 and thus isolating them from even second-hand
knowledge of the wider world beyond the mountains. Illiteracy was
common among people in mountain communities around the
Mediterranean, on into the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.50
Few people from the lands below moved up into the mountains to live,
especially in times past, and those mountain people who moved down to the
lower elevations encountered a different world, one which they often found
difficult to adjust to, and a world in which they were often not accepted,
except perhaps as sojourners for seasonal work. This pattern persisted for
centuries. In medieval times, the Adriatic port of Dubrovnik traded and
maintained good relations with the people of the hinterland the Vlach
shepherds from the mountains but they were not allowed to winter on
the territory of the Republic nor to remain within the city.51 Such negative
reactions to mountain people in the lowlands were not peculiar to medieval
Europe. Similar negative reactions to mountain peoples were common in
nineteenth century France and Morocco, and in modern Nepal, India and
Thailand.52
There was much the same resistant attitude toward mountain folk in
twentieth century America, as shown by press reactions when large
numbers of mountain people moved into urban communities. Such
resistance was exemplified by the reactions of the Chicago Tribune, as
noted in a scholarly study of migrations from the mountains:
The hillbillies were described as a degenerate population with the lowest
standard of living and moral code (if any). . . and the most savage tactics when
drunk, which is most of the time. National publicity followed, with stories in Time,
Look, and Harpers, the latter under the headline The Hillbillies Invade Chicago.
That articles subhead gave away the racial slippage: The citys toughest
integration problem has nothing to do with Negroes. . . . It involves a small army of
white Protestant, Early American migrants from the South who are usually
proud, poor, primitive, and fast with a knife. The message was clear and
intentional: these people are worse than the colored.53
The parallels with blacks go beyond the responses of others. A 1932
study of white children from small communities in the Blue Ridge
Mountains found that these white children not only had IQ scores slightly
lower than the national average of 85 for black children, but also had IQ
patterns similar to those of black children such as doing their worst on
abstract questions and having IQs closer to the U.S. national average of 100
in their early years, with a widening gap as they grew older.54 Such
similarities were especially striking because blacks were far more rare in
Southern mountain communities than in the South as a whole,55 making
genetic interactions far less likely.
Another study of mountain children, in East Tennessee schools in 1930,
found similar patterns. These children had a median IQ of 82 on one test
and 78 on another. On the test where they did better, their median IQ was 95
at age six and declined to 74 by age sixteen. a A decade later, after social,
economic and educational improvements in these East Tennessee
communities, the median IQ in the same schools rose to 87.6.56
Among those young people from the mountains in the early twentieth
century who sought higher education at Berea College in Kentucky, only
half returned to their home communities, usually those students who failed
to graduate.57 The tendency of more able or ambitious young people to
move down from the mountains, while the less able or less ambitious
remained, or moved farther up into the mountains, was expressed by a local
paradoxical saying that cream sinks and the skim milk rises in the
mountains.58 In Spain, there was a similar Catalan saying always go
down, never go up.59 This pattern of an out-migration of young people
from mountain communities has been a common pattern, whether in the
United States or in India or in other places around the world.60
There have also long been seasonal migrants from the mountains,
whether the mountainous regions of Spain, Nepal, South America or South
Africa,61 among other places. Remittances from both seasonal and longer
term migrants have played a significant role in supporting families
remaining behind in the mountains.62 Longer lasting migrations have
included many mountain men who became mercenaries in various armies63
 the Swiss and Scottish highlanders in Europe and the Gurkhas and
Montagnards in Asia, for example. Rifs from North Africa were part of
General Francisco Francos army that won the Spanish civil war in the
1930s. It has been estimated that, at a given time, there were 50,000 to
60,000 Swiss men serving in foreign armies and, over the centuries, perhaps
as many as a million Swiss soldiers died fighting in other countries wars.64
Mountain people have also been prominent among people who migrated
permanently to other countries. An early twentieth century study noted:
Even the stay-at-home French lose emigrants from their mountain
districts.65 Most of the overseas emigrants from Southern Europe to
Australia in the era before the Second World War came from geographically
less fortunate areas such as the rugged hills or mountains, the steep
coastlines or islands of the region, rather than from the urban areas or the
plains.66 Emigrants from such isolated areas were often illiterate and spoke
local dialects, rather than the official language of their respective
countries,67 much less English. They often also lacked many of the job
skills possessed by people in the more fortunate regions of the countries
from which they came. It was much the same story among emigrants from
Scotland to Australia and the United States in the nineteenth century. In
both countries, the Scottish lowlanders spoke English and had many skills,
while the Scottish highlanders spoke Gaelic and had few skills.68
Despite the largely negative influence of mountains on those who live in
them, mountains are often a boon to those on the lands below. As moistureladen
winds collide with mountain slopes, these winds are forced upward,
where the colder air reduces their moisture-carrying capacity, leading to
rain and snow. It is not uncommon for rainfall on the windward side of a
mountain range to be several times as much as the rainfall on the other side,
in what is called the rain shadow of the mountains. The nature and size of
the crops that can be grown on the windward and leeward lands varies
accordingly.
As rain water flows down the mountainsides, creating trickles of water
that join together to form streams, these streams in turn join together to
create rivers. Thus water collected from a wide area of mountain territory is
concentrated and delivered as rivers with many uses to people on the land
below. All the major rivers of the world have their beginnings in
mountains.69 Where precipitation in the mountains takes the form of snow,
the water is not released all at once, but much of it is released later and
gradually, when this snow melts during warmer weather. This means that
rivers are not solely dependent on the immediate rainfall to keep flowing,
because melting snows from the mountains provide water to sustain the
rivers during dry periods.
As with many other things, we can see its importance by seeing what
happens in its absence. Although tropical Africa has Mount Kilimanjaro, it
has no major mountain ranges comparable to those found in Asia, Europe or
the Western Hemisphere. Therefore, during the dry season in sub-Saharan
Africa, rivers and streams shrink drastically, as a result of a dearth of
melting snows in the mountains to keep these waterways supplied with
water. Meanwhile, the Sierra Nevada Mountains in Spain and the Taurus
Mountains in Turkey each supply the water that makes a flourishing
irrigated agriculture possible in the lowlands,70 where rainfall alone would
not be sufficient during the Mediterranean summer, when the sun
evaporates more water than falls as rain in that region of the world.71
The falling waters in steep terrain that keep many mountain and
highland streams and rivers from being navigable also provide opportunities
to build hydroelectric dams. But the electricity generated has been another
boon primarily for people living on the lands below, who live more closely
together, reducing the cost per capita of transmission lines. Even before the
development of electricity generation, the power of falling water was used
directly to drive machinery in various factories, much as the power of
moving air currents has been used in Holland to turn windmills that drive
machinery there.
Not only have all major rivers originated in the mountains, so have
many of the worlds food staples, such as potatoes, wheat, corn, and
beans.72 In more recent times, after both law and order and modern
technology have spread into various mountain regions, some have become
popular tourist resorts for people from the lowlands. Many handicraft
products, made by mountain people with time on their hands in winters,
have long been popular both with tourists and with people elsewhere who
import many hand-made articles from mountain communities in
Switzerland, Tibet and many other places around the world.73 These
popular handicrafts have been another reason why mountains have been a
boon to those who do not live in them. For the mountain people themselves,
the sale of these handicrafts supplement what have often been meager
incomes.
Natural Resources
Natural resources are often thought of as things originating in the earth,
such as petroleum, gold, iron ore and the like. But, although these things are
natural, they are not resources unless and until human beings learn how to
find them, process them and use them. Since human knowledge is an
integral part of what is or is not a natural resource, the total amount of
natural resources is neither fixed nor necessarily declining over time, even
after they are being used on a massive scale.
In some purely physical sense, there is of course a declining amount of
all those things currently known and used as natural resources. But the fact
that there is a physical limit to everything on the planet has often led to the
non-sequitur that we are nearing that limit. This fallacy has been at the
heart of innumerable alarms over the years that we were running out of
oil, coal, iron ore or some other natural resource claims that have proved
false, time and again, going back at least as far as the nineteenth century.
Yet the worlds known reserves of petroleum at the end of the twentieth
century were more than ten times what they were in the middle of that
century,74 when there were dire warnings that we were running out. A bestselling
book in 1960 warned that the domestic oil reserves of the United
States were enough to last only 13 years. But, at the end of those 13 years,
those reserves were larger than they had been when this dire warning was
issued.75
Nevertheless, in the next decade the President of the United States
issued an even more dire warning:
Above all, Carter stressed, the energy shortage was permanent. It was, he told the
country, the greatest challenge our country will face during our lifetimes, and it
is likely to get progressively worse. The president spoke with certainty. We
could, he told the country, use up all the proven reserves of oil in the entire world
by the end of the next decade.76
Despite such alarming statements, there was such a glut of oil on the
world markets in the early twenty-first century that its price plunged to a
fraction of what it had been in earlier years. Petroleum reserves indeed have
a finite limit, but in no way does this indicate that we are nearing that limit.
It has been much the same story with the known reserves of other natural
resources. The worlds known reserves of iron ore also increased
severalfold during the twentieth century, even while the processing of iron
ore into steel was increasing dramatically around the world. For economic
reasons, it seldom pays to find more than a minute fraction of a natural
resource at any given time, even if there is enough in the ground to last for
centuries or millennia.77 Iron ore has been used for thousands of years to
make iron and steel, and yet it is doubtful if the amount of iron ore reserves
known in ancient times was even ten percent of the iron ore reserves known
today.
The known reserves of a natural resource depend on the cost of
knowing. Oil exploration, for example, is extremely expensive. Just one
initial exploration at a site in the Gulf of Mexico cost $80 million and
another $120 million for exploratory drilling, to see if there were
indications of enough oil at that location to make it financially advisable to
proceed further.78 At such costs, it may not pay to have more than enough
specifically verified oil reserves in the world to last more than a dozen or so
years, but that does not mean that we are going to run out of oil at the end
of that time. As existing reserves are used, it pays to continuously keep
finding more. Even an existing pool of oil is not likely to be completely
drained, and much if not most of the oil may be left in the ground, or
under the sea, as the costs of extraction rise after the most easily extracted
oil is taken out. Meanwhile, new uses are being discovered for other
materials found in nature that become natural resources with the growth of
human knowledge.
It was a world-changing event in the history of the human race when the
land that people stood on became a natural resource they could use to
deliberately generate food through agriculture. This happened at some time
within the last 5 percent of the existence of human beings, when people
moved beyond gathering their food from the spontaneous produce of nature,
or fishing, hunting or herding animals, and began to plant the foods they
wanted. Virtually everything that we today recognize as civilization dates
from the beginning of agriculture, and with it the beginning of cities.
Exactly how agriculture itself arose is one of those questions whose
answer is lost in the mists of ancient times. But how agriculture came to the
Western world is known. It came from the Middle East, thousands of years
ago, and apparently originated somewhere between the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers, in what is today Iraq. This was a geographic setting in
which agriculture could not only exist but thrive, at the existing level of
knowledge at that time.
The first farmers seem unlikely to have known from the outset that
crops use up nutrients in the soil, which have to be replenished if the soil is
to continue to yield crops of the same magnitude. But, in the land between
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, farmers did not have to know that. Annual
floods washed new nutrients down over the lands, as annual floods would
also do on the lands along the Nile, where another great ancient civilization
arose, in Egypt.
In Asia, agriculture began on the Indian subcontinent, in the valley of
the Indus River, in what is today Pakistan. Despite the arid climate, melting
snows from the vast Himalayan mountain range provided the annual
flooding which fertilized the land for agriculture. Here too, some of the
earliest cities were built, and some of the earliest civilizations developed. It
was much the same story as regards the beginning of agriculture and
civilization in China:
Agriculture seems to have started in North China in the region of the great bend
of the Yellow River. . . In fact, this center of early Chinese civilization resembled in
some ways the homes of other ancient civilizations the flood plains of the Nile in
Egypt, the Tigris and Euphrates in Mesopotamia, and the Indus in modern
Pakistan.79
Elsewhere, the earliest farmers had to move on after farming a given
land a number of years and seeing the successive annual crops grow
successively smaller as the nutrients in the soil were used up, threatening
the food supply on which human survival depended. Some peoples simply
waited for nature to restore the fertility of the soil after they moved on,
seeking other lands to farm. Some other peoples burned the vegetation
before moving on, thereby providing the new nutrients that would gradually
restore fertility as these nutrients were absorbed into the soil. But between
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and along the Nile, annual floods could
keep the land fertile, long before human beings figured out what was
happening. But most other places in the world did not have this windfall
gain. Here again, we see a profound geographic inequality affecting the fates
of different peoples very differently. That inequality of fertility in the land
has continued on to the present day. As already noted, the most fertile soils
are neither evenly nor randomly distributed around the world. A huge swath
of these unusually fertile soils spreads across the vast Eurasian landmass,
beginning in Eastern Europe and extending into northeastern China. In the
Western Hemisphere, there is a large concentration of these rich soils in the
American upper midwestern and plains states, extending into parts of
Canada. In the temperate zone of South America there is another
concentration of such soils across Uruguay and in east-central Argentina.80
But the natural processes by which such soils are generated or sustained
tend not to be found in the tropics or the arctic, where soil fertility is seldom
comparable.
The crop yields per acre in tropical Africa are a fraction of the crop
yields in China or the United States.81 Among the many deficiencies of the
soil in sub-Saharan Africa is that the topsoil is often shallow, allowing little
space for plant roots to reach deep into the ground for nutrients and water.82
Moreover, the dryness of much of Africa inhibits the use of fertilizers to
supply the nutrients missing in the soil. Fertilizers used without adequate
water can inhibit, rather than enhance, the growth of crops.
Even in places where there are wetlands in central Africa, these
wetlands have not been as often cultivated as wetlands in temperate
climates, because dangerous tropical diseases like malaria and river
blindness flourish in tropical Africas wetlands.83 Here again, it is the
interactions of different geographic features in this case, climate, soil and
disease that can make outcomes very different from what they might
seem from a comparison of individual gross features such as wetlands that
occur in different regions of the world.
Differences in rainfall patterns also interact with the soil to make
agriculture more successful in some regions of the world than in others. The
rainfall pattern in parts of sub-Saharan Africa long dry spells followed by
torrential downpours is a major handicap for growing crops, in part
because the land is baked hard and dry before the massive downpours wash
away part of the topsoil. This whole pattern contrasts sharply with the
interaction of climate and soil in Western Europe or in the eastern and
central parts of the United States, where rain falls more of less evenly
throughout the year, largely on fertile soils.
a IQ scores compare test performances relative to other people of the same age in the national
population, since IQ stands for intelligence quotient and the quotient is the mental age divided
by the chronological age, and then multiplied by 100.
I
Chapter 4
C L I M AT E , A N I M A L S A N D
D I S E A S E S
mportant as waterways and lands can be as influences on economic
disparities among individuals, groups and nations, there are other
geographic factors which can be just as important in particular
circumstances. These factors include climate, animals and diseases.
CLIMATE
We may speak of climate in general terms as if it were a fixed factor,
though much hard evidence shows that it is not. Fossils of marine creatures
in the Sahara Desert clearly indicate that it was not always a desert. So do
the fossils of tropical or sub-tropical animals and plants in places too cold
for them to live today. Everything depends on the time frame of our
discussions, and how much variation in climatic conditions took place in
what is for us a long period of time, though centuries or even millennia are
small fractions of the time that the earth has existed.
Temperatures
Waters are among the many influences on climate. Large bodies of
water modify temperature on adjacent lands. Because water does not heat
up as fast as land, coastal regions tend not to be as hot in the summer as the
center of a continent. Conversely, because water does not lose its warmth as
fast as land, coastal regions tend not to be as cold in winter as the center of
a continent. Although we may think of oceans as vast inert bodies of water,
whose visible movements consist of waves and tides, there are in fact large
currents moving within oceans, some of these currents being thousands of
feet deep, dozens of miles wide and extending thousands of miles across the
oceans surface. These currents can transfer heat from one region of the
world to another, modifying climates.
As noted in Chapter 1, the interaction between latitude and the varying
warmth of ocean currents makes winter temperatures in London warmer
than in some American cities hundreds of miles farther south than London.
An even more striking result of these interactions is that Russias northern
port of Murmansk, located inside the Arctic circle, is free of ice in winter,1
due to the residual warmth of the Gulf Stream, thousands of miles from its
source, while Russian rivers hundreds of miles farther south than
Murmansk are frozen solid.
Just as the Gulf Stream transfers heat from the warmer southern
latitudes to colder northern latitudes, so other ocean currents bring vast
amounts of cold water down from northern latitudes to the west coast of the
United States, giving San Francisco the lowest average summer temperature
of any major city in the country. a Daily high temperatures in San Francisco
in July and August average in the 60s or low 70s. Meanwhile, in an inland
California city like Sacramento, less than a hundred miles northeast of San
Francisco, daily high temperatures average in the 90s during those same
months, with summer temperatures of 100 or more on particular days not
being unusual.
Other interactions involving other geographic factors elsewhere
likewise make temperatures very different from what they would be if
determined by latitude alone or by any other factor alone. The highest
temperature ever recorded in Asia, Africa, North America or South America
has in each case been recorded outside the tropics.2 Even though the heat of
sunlight is greatest in the tropics, nevertheless the sun shines more hours
per day during the summer in the temperate zones than in the tropics,3
allowing a longer daily buildup of heat and fewer hours in which to cool
down overnight. At the equator, the sun shines about 12 hours a day the
year round but, during the summer, the sun shines longer hours in the
temperate zone reaching 15 hours a day in June at a latitude 40 degrees
north or south of the equator, roughly the latitude of Philadelphia, Madrid
or Beijing.4
The longer hours of sunshine during the summer in the temperate zones
offset to a greater or lesser extent the reduced heat of the sunlight in places
outside the tropics. Most record temperatures on the inhabited continents
have been set somewhere between the 30th and 40th degrees of latitude.
Here, as in other contexts, it is the interactions of factors that produce
particular outcomes. Thus European cities in the temperate zone, such as
Athens and Seville, have had higher record temperatures than many cities
located in the tropics, including some cities located virtually on the Equator,
such as Singapore.5
Clouds are another interaction with sunlight, because clouds intercept
sunlight and reflect it back into outer space. At any given time, clouds cover
approximately half of the earth.6 But the many cloudless summer days
along the Mediterranean coast of Africa have produced higher temperature
records in cities located in the temperate zone there such as Algiers,
Tripoli and Alexandria than in many cities in tropical Africa, even cities
very near the equator, such as Nairobi or Libreville.7 In the Western
Hemisphere as well, cities with cloudless desert skies, such as Las Vegas
and Phoenix, have reached temperatures higher than cities in the tropics,
which often have many clouds and much rain. The highest temperature
recorded anywhere in the world has been recorded in Death Valley,
California, a desert in the temperate zone.8
Altitude also affects heat, so that the highest temperatures recorded in
the city of Cuzco, located in tropical latitudes in the Andes Mountains of
South America, are much lower than the highest summer temperatures
recorded in cities like New York or Paris in the temperate zone.9 Mountain
ranges can also affect the climate of nearby regions, by blocking either
warm or cold air from reaching those regions. In southeastern Europe, for
example, winter temperatures in Sarajevo may be nearly 50 degrees colder
than temperatures on the Dalmatian coast, little more than a hundred miles
away, because the Balkan mountains block off the warm air of the
Mediterranean from reaching far inland.10 In Asia, the Himalayas block
warm air from reaching Central Asia and block cold air from reaching
India.11
While we may legitimately speak in general terms about tropical
climates, temperate climates or arctic climates, more specific questions
about climates in specific places, such as particular cities or their
agricultural hinterlands, must take into account the interactions of
particular combinations of factors peculiar to those particular locations.
More generally, interactions within and between geographic, cultural,
political and other factors are necessary to understand many economic and
social outcomes.
Climate Zones
Economic historian David S. Landes was one of many scholars to note a
striking pattern of economic disparities between broad climate zones: On a
map of the world in terms of product or income per head, the rich countries
lie in the temperate zones, particularly in the northern hemisphere; the poor
countries, in the tropics and semitropics.12
Some have tried to explain the fact that countries in the temperate zones
are generally far more advanced economically and technologically than
countries in the tropics by the energy-draining heat in the tropics, or by the
many debilitating diseases that flourish there,13 diseases whose
microorganisms are killed off by cold winters in the temperate zones. We
have also seen that the most fertile soils are virtually non-existent in the
tropics. Nevertheless, many people from outside the tropics have gone to
live in the tropics and prospered there, often far more so than the indigenous
populations. The overseas Chinese minority in Southeast Asia and the
Lebanese minority in West Africa are striking examples.
The British who settled in Australia are perhaps an even more striking
example, since they became the majority population of the country, and
about 40 percent of Australia is in the tropics. People of Japanese, Chinese
and European ancestry are a major part of the population of tropical Hawaii,
and are prospering there.
Ordinarily, it might be expected that people indigenous to a given
geographic setting would be better able to make the most of that settings
opportunities, and better able to cope with its disadvantages, than people
from a very different setting. Yet the evidence seems to suggest the
opposite. But, as we have seen in other contexts, geographic environments
affect people not only by the direct economic benefits or handicaps of those
environments but also by the extent to which those environments facilitate
or restrict the development of the knowledge, skills, experiences, habits and
values the human capital of the people themselves.
If the geographic settings of the temperate zones foster the kind of
human capital that promotes prosperity in whatever climate people live,
then it is not so surprising that peoples transplanted from temperate to
tropical climates prosper more in those climates than the peoples indigenous
to the tropics. As a noted geographer observed, particular cultures may
thrive in regions where they could never have originated.14
What cultural consequences of life in the temperate zones might be
valuable in other regions that were unlikely to produce such cultures? The
most striking social difference between living in the temperate zones and
living in the tropics is not simply the difference in average temperatures,
despite another noted geographer who once built a whole theory of
economic and social progress on temperature differences in different parts
of the world that affected peoples abilities to work.15 Instead, the lifethreatening
challenge that dominated the temperate zones of the world for
millennia was growing enough food during the limited spring and summer
months to last through the cold winter months. It was an inescapable
necessity, for sheer physical survival, to begin planting and harvesting at
whatever times of the year were dictated by the local climate. In many
places, that meant beginning the arduous tasks of preparing the land for
planting early in the spring but, in parts of the Mediterranean lands with
their peculiar rainfall patterns, it meant planting in the autumn.16
In any event, this meant that peoples living where seasons changed
drastically during the course of a year had to develop a sense of urgency
about time, and the self-discipline to fit ones life and efforts to seasonal
requirements. Such qualities were not nearly so necessary in places where
food could be grown year round, in addition to the availability of much food
spontaneously supplied by nature in many tropical lands, or simply
requiring hunting on land or fishing in waters.
The other inescapable necessity of the temperate zones, where seasons
are so different from each other, was systematically saving food to store for
the winter. This required not only the self-discipline of saving, but also the
conversion of perishable foods like milk and fruit into storable foods like
cheese and jam. Here again, this was not such a pressing necessity in the
tropics. Moreover, tropical foods such as bananas and pineapples were not
as storable in a hot climate as wheat or potatoes were in a cooler climate.
Modern economic and technological conditions have so freed us from
having to consider such things that it is easy to overlook how imperative
those things were for physical survival in the millennia before humans were
able to transport vast amounts of food over great distances or to store many
kinds of food in commercially dried, canned or frozen forms.
Much has been made of the fact that the Incas created a larger and more
sophisticated civilization in the tropics than most societies indigenous to
places elsewhere in the tropics during the same era. However, the climate in
which the Inca civilization developed was not typical of either the tropics or
the temperate zones. Not only does the highest daily high temperature for
any month average 73 degrees in Cuzco, the former capital of the Incas, the
lowest daily high temperature for any month averages 68 degrees. But
despite very little change in daily high temperatures during the course of a
year, there is a rainy season and a dry season, with variations in
precipitation ranging from a monthly average of 5 millimeters in June to
163 millimeters in January. In addition, overnight temperatures range down
to freezing levels in winter.17
Because of differences in rainfall and differences in overnight
temperatures in different times of the year, there were different seasons
when particular crops could be grown, even though agriculture in general
was a year-round activity for the Inca population in the Andes Mountains.
In short, while the climate in which the Inca Empire arose was not typical
of either the tropics or the temperate zone, its highly variable growing
seasons for different crops18 did present the same inescapable challenge
faced by inhabitants of the temperate zones namely, the self-discipline of
conforming ones life and work to a time frame dictated by the seasonally
changing conditions in agriculture.
With the high altitudes of the Andes Mountains offsetting the heat of
tropical sunshine, the empire of the Incas was tropical only in the narrowest
sense of being located between particular lines on a map.
ANIMALS
The geography of the vast temperate zones of the Western Hemisphere
is in many ways much like the geography of Western Europe, especially in
the generous supply of rivers and harbors in the United States, as well as its
vast level plains and, in New England, rich fishing regions offshore in the
Atlantic. Yet the indigenous cultures of the Western Hemisphere were very
different from the cultures of Western Europe. This might seem to suggest
that geography has had little or no influence on the economic fate of
peoples. However, we need to recall yet again that it is the interactions of
various geographic factors that are crucial to economic and social
outcomes. What was totally lacking throughout the Western Hemisphere
when the Europeans arrived were horses, oxen or other heavy-duty draft
animals and heavy-duty beasts of burden.
Transportation
During the millennia before motorized vehicles were invented, horses
were crucial to everything from transportation to farming to warfare in
Europe. Among the many things which originated in Asia that became part
of European culture including paper, bells, printing, gunpowder, the
compass, rudders, spaghetti, chess, playing cards and so-called Arabic
numerals b most traveled across the Eurasian landmass primarily by
horse.19 Without horses or oxen, the evolution of the whole European
economy and society would have had to be radically different. And, without
such heavy-duty draft animals or heavy-duty beasts of burden as existed in
Europe (or the camels, water buffalo or elephants elsewhere), the
economies and societies throughout the Western Hemisphere were in fact
radically different from those in Europe.
The economic and cultural repercussions reached further: Nowhere in
the Western Hemisphere were there wheeled vehicles. Although the wheel
has often been regarded as a landmark in the technological progress of the
human race, for most of the history of the human species the value of
wheeled vehicles depended greatly on the availability of draft animals to
pull such vehicles. In the Western Hemisphere, the Mayans created wheels
but they were used on childrens toys.20 The issue is not the intellectual
capacity to invent the wheel but the economic value of wheels in the
absence of animals to pull vehicles, during the millennia before motorized
transport.
The lack of heavy-duty draft animals or heavy-duty beasts of burden on
land even affected what was economically feasible in water transportation.
At the time of the arrival of Europeans in the Western Hemisphere, nowhere
in North America or South America were there boats as large as the ships of
Europeans, much less the even larger and more advanced ships that the
Chinese had developed earlier. The economic viability of large ships
depends on the availability of means of efficiently collecting large enough
cargoes on land both from the immediate ports and from the hinterlands
 to fill such ships before a voyage, and an ability to efficiently disperse
large cargoes at the destination port and into its hinterlands.
A complete absence of animals capable of carrying out such tasks limits
the size of vessels that are economically viable. Waterborne commerce in
the Western Hemisphere, as of the time of the arrival of Europeans, was
conducted in smaller vessels, such as canoes. What this meant was that the
indigenous populations of North America and South America had both a
smaller economic universe and a smaller cultural universe than that of many
peoples in Europe, Asia or North Africa. Not only could exotic goods travel
thousands of miles across the Eurasian landmass, they could also travel
thousands of miles across water in large ships. Much knowledge from the
Middle East and North Africa also found its way into Europe, including the
agricultural and architectural advances that the North African Moors
brought with them when they invaded and conquered Spain.
The limitations of both land and water transport in the Western
Hemisphere before the arrival of Europeans meant severe limitations on
cultural diffusions, whether of languages, agricultural methods, animal
domestication practices or political systems. Both the distances and the pace
of cultural diffusion in the Western Hemisphere were far more limited in the
Western Hemisphere than in the Eurasian and North African lands of the
Eastern Hemisphere. For example:
The wheels invented in Mesoamerica as parts of toys never met the llamas
domesticated in the Andes, to generate wheeled transport for the New World. From
east to west in the Old World, the Macedonian Empire and the Roman Empire both
spanned 3,000 miles, the Mongol Empire 6,000 miles. But the empires and states of
Mesoamerica had no political relations with, and apparently never even heard of,
the chiefdoms of the eastern United States 700 miles to the north or the empires and
states of the Andes 1,200 miles to the south.21
By contrast, horse-drawn wheeled vehicles existed simultaneously in
both France and China, located 8,000 miles apart.22 Meanwhile, such crops
as corn and beans took thousands of years to travel from Mexico to the
eastern United States.23 More generally, according to Professor Jared
Diamond of UCLA, there was no diffusion of domestic animals, writing,
or political entities, and limited or slow diffusion of crops and technology,
between the New World centers of Mesoamerica, the eastern United States,
and the Andes and Amazonia.24 In short, cultural universes were not
nearly as extensive in the Western Hemisphere as in the Eastern
Hemisphere, prior to the arrival of the Europeans.
When the British first confronted the Iroquois on the east coast of North
America, the mental and material resources at the disposal of these two
races were by no means confined to what they had each developed
themselves. The British had been able to navigate across the Atlantic, in the
first place, by using the compass invented in China, doing mathematical
calculations with a numbering system from India, steering with rudders
invented in China, writing on paper invented in China, using letters created
by the Romans, and ultimately prevailing in combat using gunpowder, also
invented in China. The Iroquois had no comparably wide cultural universe.
The cultural universe matters, and animals have been among the reasons
for large disparities in the size of the cultural universe in different
geographic settings. The relative cultural handicaps of the indigenous
peoples of the Western Hemisphere were not unique. Similar handicaps,
among others, restricted the cultural universe of the peoples of sub-Saharan
Africa, and still more so the cultural universe of the aboriginal population
of Australia.
Animals whether draft animals, beasts of burden, farm animals or
herd animals were no more evenly or randomly distributed around the
world than other factors in economic and social development. Dromedaries
and camels, for example, were concentrated in desert lands, from the Sahara
in North Africa to the Gobi Desert in Asia dromedaries in the hot deserts
and camels proper in the cooler deserts and highlands.25 Indispensable in
deserts, because of their ability to travel long distances between sources of
drinking water, dromedaries and camels were rare to non-existent
elsewhere.
Horses were key to the conquests of the great mounted warriors of
Central Asia, such as those led by Genghis Khan and other empire builders
such as the Ottomans, who penetrated into the Middle East and then
extended their conquests up into Southeastern Europe. Other mounted
warriors from Asia swept westward into Eastern Europe, forcing a chain
reaction of westward movements of Slavs and others, often driving existing
populations westward before them or driving them up into mountains from
their homes on the plains. Yet horses were rare within China and even rarer
in India and sub-Saharan Africa,26 as well as totally non-existent in
Australia before the Europeans arrived there in the late eighteenth century.
The arrival of Europeans in the Western Hemisphere radically changed
the animal population in the New World, and with it the economic life of
that half of the world. The most important for economic life were mules,
which gradually became indispensable as carriers in much of South
America, according to historian Fernand Braudel. There were half a million
mules in Peru alone in 1776, and perhaps as many as two million in the
hemisphere altogether. Nowhere else in the world was there a comparable
concentration of mules, relative to the human population, except in Europe.
Horses and oxen also proliferated throughout the Western Hemisphere after
the Europeans arrived.27 The gauchos of Argentina became famous for
their horsemanship and the plains Indians in the United States became
mounted hunters and warriors by mastering this new mode of travel. But
such an animal revolution was prevented in tropical Africa, because of the
tsetse fly and, in Australia, because suitable animals were simply nonexistent.
Isolation
A common handicap of lagging groups around the world has been
isolation, whether in mountain villages, on islands remote from the nearest
mainland, or living where deserts obstruct access to the rest of the world. A
dearth of animals also contributes to the isolation of peoples living in the
same environment, often physically not very far from each other.
In addition to having impediments to communication with the outside
world, the peoples of sub-Saharan Africa have had major impediments to
communication with each other. The dearth of navigable waterways was
just one of those impediments. The presence of rift valleys and jungles also
fragmented many of the indigenous peoples. The dearth of beasts of burden,
due to the tsetse fly that flourishes in much of tropical Africa, and carries a
disease deadly to animals, adds to the impediments to local transportation
and communication. The colorful African custom of people carrying
bundles on their heads is a painful sign of a grim reality where there are few
beasts of burden such as horses or camels, which can carry much more
freight, much more efficiently.
Another of the cultural factors fragmenting peoples in tropical Africa
has been a multiplicity of languages, out of all proportion to the size of the
population. Although the population of Africa is about 50 percent larger
than the population of Europe, Africans have about nine times as many
languages as Europeans. Africans have about 90 percent as many languages
as Asians, who outnumber them nearly four to one.28 Extreme linguistic
diversity is not only a sign of social isolation and a resulting cultural
fragmentation, it contributes to the barriers separating African peoples from
each other, as well as from the outside world.
Isolation has not been absolute, either in the Western Hemisphere or in
sub-Saharan Africa, but cultural universes have not been at all comparable
in size to those in much of Europe, Asia or North Africa. An even more
severe isolation, in an even more geographically unpromising environment,
was the fate of the aboriginal population of Australia before the Europeans
arrived there in the eighteenth century.
Beasts of burden were even more completely lacking in Australia than
in sub-Saharan Africa, or in the Western Hemisphere before the Europeans
arrived. Such animals were totally non-existent in Australia when the
British arrived, just as they were non-existent in most of the Western
Hemisphere when Europeans arrived there in the fifteenth century, though
there were at least llamas in the Andes, where they were used as pack
animals.29 However, llamas were not large enough to be ridden like horses.
Also lacking in Australia were farm animals like cows, goats or sheep.
Australia had other severe geographic handicaps. In the ages before
modern transportation, this vast island continent was isolated in the
Southern Hemisphere, far from the mainland of Asia and even more distant
from other inhabited continents. Much of the soil of Australia was of low
fertility,30 and much of the interior was a desert. Rainfall was even less
reliable in the interior of Australia than in sub-Saharan Africa, with its long
months without rain, followed by torrential downpours. In the vast interior
desert of Australia, there were years without rain, followed by summer
downpours.31 This was not an environment favoring either agriculture or
spontaneous vegetation, except along a coastal fringe.
Back in times when it was common to speak more frankly about
different levels of achievements by different peoples, a scholarly study of
world geography said that blacks in Africa, taken as a whole, occupy a
higher economic and cultural rank than the black races of Australia and
Melanesia.32 When the Europeans arrived in Australia in the eighteenth
century, they found the aborigines lacking iron, even though iron was used
by indigenous peoples in sub-Saharan Africa more than a thousand years
earlier and even though Australia had some of the worlds largest iron ore
deposits. Again, the role of geography has not been simply as a direct
supplier of natural wealth, but also and more importantly as a facilitator or
impediment to a larger cultural universe, from which to gain the knowledge
to turn natural resources into wealth.
The Australian aborigines likewise lacked a knowledge of animal
husbandry and many kinds of agriculture known to the peoples of sub-
Saharan Africa, among other peoples in geographic settings with the
physical prerequisites for acquiring or developing such knowledge. But
even during the era of genetic determinism in the early twentieth century,
not everyone attributed the lags of the Australian aborigines to genes.
The aborigines lack of knowledge of things known to others, according
to a geographic treatise published in 1911, must be attributed to their
insularity, such as was also the case among the native Canary Islanders33
 who were Caucasian.34 The fundamental problem of the Australian
aborigines was seen as the geography of Australia. When the Europeans
arrived, Australia presented the unique spectacle of a whole continent with
its population still held in the vise of nature35 and was the classic ground
of retardation,36 according to the same treatise. Another geographer,
writing in 1924, mentioned Australia, where primitive man is at his
lowest, but added that a people subjected to such environments could
scarcely be expected to develop greatly.37
Australias isolation applied to animals as well as human beings. None
of the animals of Asia the next nearest continent was present in
Australia when the British arrived in the eighteenth century.38 Animals that
were common in other parts of the world, such as bears, monkeys, hoofed
animals and the various kinds of cats from house cats to lions and tigers
 were also non-existent in Australia,39 like the cattle, sheep and goats
already noted.
Nor were such Australian animals as kangaroos or koalas indigenous
elsewhere. Most of the trees in Australia were of the Eucalyptus family,
which is indigenous nowhere else. Many kinds of plants, birds and
freshwater fish c were also unique to Australia. To a remarkable extent,
Australia was for millennia its own separate world biologically.
The isolation of the island continents flora and fauna gives some idea
of the isolation of its human beings.40 Multiple evidences point toward an
isolated land and an isolated people. There was similar evidence of
prolonged isolation in the Canary Islands, where there were hundreds of
plants unique to those islands,41 and a backwardness similar to that of the
Australian aborigines, though the two groups are racially different and
located many thousands of miles apart.
In Australia, as in the Western Hemisphere, the arrival of Europeans led
to the transplanting of European animals and, even more important, the
transplanting of European knowledge, gathered from vastly larger
geographic regions, forming a far larger cultural universe than that available
to the indigenous population of Australia.
Europeans largely avoided the huge interior desert of Australia and
settled primarily around the coastal fringes of the continent, often
concentrated in cities that could be supplied with food from advanced
agricultural practices developed elsewhere, and from domesticated animals
brought from Europe cities that would not have been viable for huntergatherers
such as the aborigines. As for the aborigines native intelligence,
Charles Darwin observed them during his historic voyage around the world
in the early nineteenth century, and concluded, they appeared far from
being such utterly degraded beings as they have usually been represented.
He said that they had wonderful sagacity in tracking animals or men, and
some of the remarks attributed to them manifested considerable
acuteness.42
The low fertility of much Australian soil, except along the coastal
fringes, was compensated by the presence of rich natural resources,
including not only iron ore but also titanium ore, of which Australia became
the worlds leading exporter.43 But what were natural resources for the
Europeans were not natural resources for the Australian aborigines, lacking
exposure to the scientific knowledge developed over the centuries in a
cultural universe extending across the vast Eurasian landmass and including
the Middle East and North Africa.
DISEASES
Diseases are not mere incidental aspects of life. The influenza pandemic
of 19181919 is estimated to have taken more lives than the contemporary
First World War, the most devastating and lethal war in all of history at that
point. Diseases have also affected the course of history.
Europeans knew of the existence of Africa thousands of years before
they learned of the existence of the Western Hemisphere. Yet European
empires were established in the Western Hemisphere hundreds of years
before the scramble for Africa began in the late nineteenth century and
led to European colonial empires that extended throughout the continent.
Diseases had much to do with the differing fates of these different regions
of the world. Microorganisms that most of the humans involved knew
nothing about at the time were, in effect, on the side of the Europeans
during their conquests in the Western Hemisphere. But microorganisms
were on the side of the indigenous peoples in tropical Africa.
The much larger cultural universe of the Europeans, compared to that of
the various peoples of the Western Hemisphere, meant a much larger
disease universe as well. Diseases endemic in Asia repeatedly made their
way to Europe, along with the goods traded across thousands of miles on
the Eurasian landmass, and by seaborne trade as well. This international
commerce transmitted diseases from Asia, creating epidemics in Europe
that, from time to time, wiped out significant fractions of the European
population from a third to a half of the population in parts of Europe
during the bubonic plague of the fourteenth century.44 But the survivors of
these devastating incursions of diseases from Asia developed biological
resistance to those diseases, in addition to having biological resistance to
diseases originating in Europe.
When European and indigenous races confronted each other in the
Western Hemisphere, whether in battle or in peace, the microorganisms that
neither of them knew about decimated the indigenous peoples, while the
Europeans were not nearly as vulnerable to the diseases of the Western
Hemisphere, though syphilis began to spread in Europe after the return of
the first European sailors from the Western Hemisphere.45
Once European diseases took root in the indigenous populations of the
Western Hemisphere, these diseases spread through whole native societies,
to people who had no direct contact with Europeans. When Pizarros army
was marching toward the capital of the Incas, people who had never seen a
European were dying of European diseases inside that capital.46 It was said
of a kindly Spanish priest, who went among the native peoples of the
Western Hemisphere in friendship, as a missionary, that he was probably
responsible for more deaths among them than even the most brutal
conquistador.47 It was not uncommon, in parts of the Western Hemisphere,
for half or more of a given tribe of indigenous people to be wiped out by
European diseases to which they had no biological resistance.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the tropical diseases were so deadly to outsiders
that, at one time, the average life expectancy of a white man in tropical
Africa was said to be less than one year. No part of Europe is in the tropics,
and Europeans exposure to other peoples was largely in the temperate
zones, so most Europeans had little opportunity to develop biological
resistance to tropical diseases. Only after medical science advanced to the
point where it could cope with deadly tropical diseases by either curing
them or preventing them by public health measures was it feasible for
Europeans to establish empires in tropical, sub-Saharan Africa. The
swiftness with which these conquests were accomplished suggests that the
human defenders in tropical Africa were not nearly as formidable as the
unseen microorganisms that had held European conquerors at bay for
centuries. Yet again, a given environment does not determine a fixed
outcome, because of its interactions with changing human knowledge in
this case, medical knowledge.
Among the peoples of tropical Africa, diseases contributed to their
isolation from each other, because of the devastating effects of diseases
carried by the tsetse fly on animals that might otherwise have become
beasts of burden or useful draft animals that could have helped connect
different peoples, and could have played useful roles in agriculture.
North and south of the tropics, the situation was very different in Africa.
Europeans began settling in what is now the Republic of South Africa the
great majority of which is in the temperate zone of the Southern
Hemisphere in the middle of the seventeenth century. In ancient times,
the Romans incorporated much of North Africa, in the temperate zone of
the Northern Hemisphere, within their empire. There being no decisive
disease barrier between Europeans and North Africans around the
Mediterranean, conquests went each way in different periods of history. The
North African Moors invaded and conquered Spain during what were the
Middle Ages in Europe, and retained control of Spain for centuries, leaving
behind both physical and cultural remains of the society they created during
their reign.
It was not only in the Western Hemisphere that the larger disease
universe of the Europeans proved deadly to peoples they encountered.
Writing of his observations during his round-the-world voyage, Charles
Darwin said:
Wherever the European has trod, death seems to pursue the aboriginal. We may
look to the wide extent of the Americas, Polynesia, the Cape of Good Hope, and
Australia, and we find the same result.48
Darwin quoted other observers in various parts of the world, who
likewise reported that the arrival of Europeans brought deadly diseases to
the native population, even when the Europeans themselves showed no sign
of these diseases. In other words, the Europeans were carriers of the disease
microorganisms, but their own biological resistance protected themselves.
This was not unique to Europeans, however. Darwin pointed out that some
Polynesians had a similar effect on people in the East Indies. It was said
that the same phenomenon could also be seen among animals, that
according to another observer, sheep, which have been imported from
vessels, although themselves in a healthy condition, if placed in the same
fold with others, frequently produce sickness in the flock.49
Diseases are no more evenly distributed around the world than other
geographic factors. Malaria is a tropical disease but it has been a sufficient
danger in countries outside the tropics to cause many peoples in temperate
zones to locate their homes up on hillsides, even when they work during the
day on farms in the lands below, where there are mosquitoes that may be
carrying the disease. But usually these mosquitoes are not as prevalent
during the daylight hours as they are in the evening.
At one time, malaria was prevalent in the Great Lakes regions of both
Canada and the United States, as well as in various other parts of the United
States. With the passage of time, however, various defensive measures and
preventive measures had malaria in retreat, persisting longest in the South,
where the Mississippi River system and various Atlantic and Gulf Coast
rivers meander sluggishly through level coastal plains on the slow route to
the sea.50 Since malaria-carrying mosquitoes breed in stagnant or sluggish
waters, the same geographic features that make rivers navigable also made
them sources of malaria in the South, longer than in much of the rest of the
country.
LOCATION
Location is a significant geographic factor, even aside from the
particular characteristics of a particular location itself. For the ancient
Greeks to be located near where agriculture developed in the Middle East
gave them historic opportunities that they used to make historic intellectual
contributions to Western civilization and to the world:
Greece stands for the very foundation of Western thought and sensibility. It
stands for science and mathematics, for skepticism and observation as opposed to a
world ruled by supranational forces. Greece is the birthplace of philosophical
inquiry that still shapes modern thinking from Platos rationalism to Aristotles
empiricism. The first recorded works of the Western literary tradition are the epic
poems of Homer and Hesiod. Aeschylus invented drama, Sophocles gave us
tragedy, Aristophanes was the father of comedy. Herodotus and Thucydides set the
model for the study of history. Pericles stands for the art of oratory, and the Athens
of his time was the fount of democracy.51
For the islands of Japan to be located where China was readily
accessible across water meant that the Japanese had access to a civilization
that for centuries was in the forefront of human advances and thus Japan
could, for example, adapt Chinese writing to make their own language a
written language. This meant that the Japanese had an opportunity to
become literate, centuries before other peoples in Asia or elsewhere who
were not located near a more advanced civilization. Nor did small, isolated
communities have the same incentives for developing writing themselves as
larger, more widespread societies with numerous commercial and other
interactions taking place at distances too great for verbal communication
alone.
The advantages of coastal peoples over inland peoples, or the
advantages of peoples on the plains over peoples living in mountains, are
advantages conferred by the simple fact of location, and are advantages
common around the world. During the era of mass immigration from
Europe to the United States, Polish immigrants from Russia or from Austria
 Poland itself having been dismembered and absorbed into these empires
 were almost always unskilled workers, but those relatively few Polish
immigrants who did have specialized work skills as weavers, tailors or
cabinet makers were predominantly from Prussia,52 where they acquired
such skills from being located in a German culture.
During the era of European colonialism, location near Western
institutions like schools gave those segments of the conquered people in
such locations major advantages over their compatriots in the hinterlands.
Other locational differences created other locational windfall gains or
windfall losses. In colonial Ceylon, for example, British missionaries set up
schools in more favored portions of the island nation, while the British
authorities assigned American missionaries to the less favored northern tip
of the island, where the Tamil minority was concentrated. But, because the
American missionary schools concentrated more in science and
mathematics, the Tamils became more proficient in these fields and better
represented in occupations requiring such training. A study found that
members of the Tamil minority received a majority of the As on university
entry exams.53
In Nigeria, the Ibos lived in the poorly endowed southern part of the
country, and had once been slaves, but they seized upon opportunities
provided by Western missionary schools in their region, while the peoples
of the Muslim north rejected schools run by Christian missionaries. The
Ibos rose to such professional, administrative and business occupations as
were open to Africans under British rule, far more so than the peoples in
northern Nigeria and Ibos dominated such occupations, even in northern
Nigeria.
The location of the United States, insulated by two oceans from the
wars that ravaged Europe and Asia, enabled the American people to
develop their own way of life in relative peace, using the culture that had
developed in Europe without having to suffer the devastating, and
sometimes incessant, wars that their European ancestors and
contemporaries had to endure. By contrast, Mediterranean islands like
Sicily and Malta were located in the path of contending nations and empires
that, for centuries, fought each other over, and on, the territory of these
islands, leaving behind a legacy of destruction, conquest and both culturally
and genetically altered populations. Similarly situated small islands met a
similar fate in various other regions of the world.54
Britain is an island even closer to the nearest continent than various
islands in the Mediterranean but, in addition to being a much larger island,
and therefore much harder to conquer, Britain has not been located in the
crossfire between contending empires. Moreover, the rough waters of the
English Channel have been more of an obstacle to conquering invaders than
the calm waters of the Mediterranean. Nothing provides absolute protection,
of course. After all, Britain was invaded and conquered by the Romans in
ancient times and by the Normans nearly a thousand years later. But, after
eventually becoming a unified and advanced nation in the wake of the
Norman conquest of 1066, Britain has not been invaded in nearly another
thousand years since then. What the English Channel has also done during
that time has been to make it unnecessary for Britain to maintain a large
standing army, like those of nations on the continent of Europe, sparing the
British both the expense and the political dangers of large standing armies.
d
Location has mattered, not only for Britain as a whole, but also for its
internal constituents. Being located near enough to continental Europe to
have ready access to the trade and technology of its European neighbors
allowed the British to gain the benefits of those continental nations that
were for centuries more advanced than the British. These advantages were
most beneficial to England, the closest part of Britain to the European coast.
These advantages passed, with a lag, to other parts of the British Isles
Wales, Scotland and Ireland as did the further advantages when England
began to surpass its continental neighbors and lead the world into the
industrial revolution.
The fate of whole races, nations and civilizations can depend on
whether they happen to be located in the right place at the right time or in
the wrong place at the wrong time. Moreover, what was the right place or
the wrong place has varied greatly over the centuries.
a Humorist Mark Twain said that the coldest winter he could remember was a summer in San
Francisco.
b These numerals, which eventually replaced Roman numerals, were called Arabic numerals
because Europeans first saw them in use among Arabs, but these numerals originated in India.
c Saltwater fish in the ocean were of course not confined to any given continent.
d This peculiar felicity of situation has, in a great degree, contributed to preserve the liberty which
that country to this day enjoys, in spite of the prevalent venality and corruption. If, on the contrary,
Britain had been situated on the continent, and had been compelled as she would have been, by that
situation, to make her military establishments at home coextensive with those of the other great
powers of Europe, she, like them, would in all probability be, at this day, a victim to the absolute
power of a single man. Alexander Hamilton, Consequences of Wars Between States, Alexander
Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay, The Federalist, Number 8, edited by Benjamin Fletcher
Wright (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1961), p. 123.
PART II:
CULTURAL FACTORS
If we learn anything from the history of economic
development, it is that culture makes almost all the
difference. Witness the enterprise of expatriate
minorities the Chinese in East and Southeast Asia,
Indians in East Africa, Lebanese in West Africa, Jews
and Calvinists throughout much of Europe, and on
and on. Yet culture, in the sense of the inner values
and attitudes that guide a population, frightens
scholars.
David S. Landes
Geography is an influence but not predestination. Much of the
influence of geography on income and wealth derives from its effects
on the size of the cultural universe available to different peoples in different
physical settings. An enumeration of places with rich concentrations of
natural resources, such as oil in Saudi Arabia or gold in South Africa,
would be a very poor guide to places with high incomes per capita. As The
Economist magazine said of Nigeria, it is rich in oil reserves but otherwise
desperately poor.1
Without the cultural prerequisites for developing natural resources into
real wealth, the raw physical resources themselves are of little or no value.
The natural resources we use today were even more abundant in the era of
the cave man, but the people of that prehistoric era were culturally not yet
able to use most of those resources.
Even physical capital is of little or no use without the cultural
prerequisites to operate it, maintain it, repair and replace it as it wears out.
Conversely, the mass destruction of physical capital, as in Western Europe
during World War II, was followed by an economic recovery in a relatively
few years after the war was over. That recovery has often been credited to
aid from the United States under the Marshall Plan. But subsequent efforts
to promote similar economic development in the Third World with transfers
of both financial capital and physical capital to the governments of those
countries, over a long period of decades, have failed repeatedly to produce
anything comparable.
The difference is that the cultural prerequisites the human capital
which produced the physical capital in Western Europe before the war
survived the war and could produce it again. But that particular human
capital, which developed over the centuries in Western Europe, did not exist
on the same scale in the Third World, and could not be created overnight, or
even over several decades, in societies with a very different set of cultures.
Third World countries were not being asked to re-create their own societies
after some calamity. They were essentially being asked to create a Western
economy without the centuries of the particular cultural evolution that led
up to those economies in the West.
Geography is not the only limitation on the size of the cultural universe
available to a given population. Language is another. Quite aside from
whatever qualitative criteria linguistic scholars might apply to a given
language such as its consistency, precision or subtlety the sheer
quantitative dimension, the number of people who speak that language, can
determine its economic and social value to the people to whom it is their
native tongue. Since language is a means of communication, how many
people a given language can communicate with is one major measure of its
value to those who speak it. If the number of people around the world who
speak Czech is a fraction of the number of people who speak German, then
even various Czech scientists, philosophers, novelists, and other writers
may choose to write in German to reach a wider audience. For the same
reason, books published in other languages are more likely to be translated
into English or German than to be translated into Czech or Catalan.
What this means is that even if Czechs and Germans were the same in
everything else which is seldom the case between any two groups a
substantial difference in the size of their respective populations would
create a difference in the size of their respective cultural universes, and
therefore in the range of economic and other opportunities open to them.
This was even more of a factor in centuries past, when literacy was not
nearly as widespread, so that the size of the reading public often differed,
even among populations of similar size, so that there was little incentive for
anyone to publish as much in one language as in another, much less
translate writings from other languages into the languages of relatively
small literate populations.
In earlier centuries, it was also common for many pockets of different
languages and dialects to persist, before improved mass communications
arose to homogenize the language and culture across broader regions within
a given country. In times past, isolated mountain or highland villages, for
example, often spoke different languages and dialects from those of the
surrounding population on the lands below, and sometimes different from
one village to another. Moreover, many of these languages and dialects had
no written versions. The same was true in isolated pockets of indigenous
peoples displaced by invading populations, as in North America, South
America, Australia and New Zealand, for example. Here the leaders of
these displaced indigenes, as well as outsiders sympathetic to their plight,
have often urged the preservation, or even resurrection, of their native
languages and cultures, even though such linguistic isolation would be a
major handicap inhibiting their progress in the world around them, after the
world of their ancestors, in which indigenous cultures evolved, was now
irretrievably lost.
Cultures also differ in their respective time horizons. Even within a
given culture, different age groups often have different time horizons.
Paradoxically, the young who have decades of life ahead of them are often
more focused on the immediate present, while the old whose years ahead
may be few often think of the long-run consequences for their children and
grandchildren or the fate of society as a whole. Given that different
societies have different mixtures of old and young with societies often
differing in median age by two decades or more those societies with a
large proportion of young males especially may be more volatile in their
reactions to passing events and less mindful of the longer term
consequences of precipitous actions. Even when leaders of these societies
are of mature years, the political weight of the more volatile youth can
influence policies focused on the immediate present.
Time is important in other ways, and these ways likewise differ from
one culture to another. As already noted in Chapter 4, there was an urgency
attached to conforming ones activities to the requirements of the season of
the year in temperate zones, during the millennia when agriculture was the
largest and most important economic activity. Time has also acquired
increasing importance in a different sense. In more recent times, the rise of
commercial and industrial societies has made punctuality essential to
coordinating many activities requiring simultaneous interactions in factories
and offices. Here, as in other things, some cultures have made punctuality
more of a priority than other cultures have. Germans and Japanese, for
example, have tended to be more strictly punctual than the peoples of Latin
America, perhaps reflecting different levels and/or longer traditions of
industrialization and commercialization. But habits, however formed, have
consequences, long after the conditions in which those habits were formed
have changed.
Great conquering peoples, whose elites have been able to live off wealth
extracted from the conquered and the plundered, have been able to disdain
commerce, industry and labor as the occupations of those they have
subordinated, while celebrating the military traditions and the leisurely and
luxurious lifestyle of their elites, made possible by those conquests. But,
long after the era of their military glory has passed, the cultural attitudes
formed among the elites of that era can remain and, diffused beyond the
elite, serve as a cultural impediment to the economic advancement of a
society long exempted from a necessity to develop the human capital of its
own people.
Spain was a classic example during its golden age in the sixteenth
century, when gold and silver poured in literally by the ton from its
conquered lands in the Western Hemisphere. Spains earlier, centuries-long
military campaigns to drive out the Moors, who had conquered and ruled
them, was a valuable prelude and preparation for Spanish military
conquests that gave them the worlds largest empire in the century that
followed the reconquest of their own land. But, as a noted historian pointed
out, The Spaniards had acquired their national unity and built a huge
Empire by being soldiers and crusaders, not by being merchants and
craftsmen.2 A contemporary Venetian ambassador said of sixteenth
century Spain, I do not think that there is another country less provided
with skilled workers than Spain. Its technology lagged, even at the height
of its military glory, and Spain was also backward in the sciences, compared
to contemporary European nations.3
Nevertheless, the vast wealth pouring into Spain, especially from the
Western Hemisphere, allowed the Spanish elite to live in luxury and leisure,
enjoying the products of other countries, purchased with the windfall gain
of gold and silver. At one point, Spains imports were nearly twice as large
as its exports, with the difference being covered by payments in gold and
silver. One of the consequences was that, not long after ships arrived from
the Western Hemisphere laden with these precious metals, gold and silver
would be in short supply in Spain.4
It was a source of pride, however, that all the world served Spain,
while Spain serves nobody,5 as a proud Spaniard of that era put it. But
what this meant economically was that other countries developed the human
capital that produced what Spain consumed, without Spains having to
develop its own human capital, even among its inactive, though
prosperous, aristocracy.6 Even the maritime trade that brought products
from other parts of Europe to Spain was largely in the hands of foreigners,
and European businessmen flocked to Spain to carry out economic
functions there.7 The historic social consequence was that the Spanish
cultures disdain for commerce, industry and skilled labor would be a
lasting economic handicap bequeathed to its descendants, not only in Spain
itself but also in Latin America. This cultural legacy would last long past
the time when Spain could simply live on the gold and silver extracted from
the Western Hemisphere.
Other kinds of windfall gains can likewise relieve other societies, or
particular groups within a given society, from the pressures to develop their
own human capital to the fullest. The vast, rich and readily accessible
petroleum deposits in the Middle East have allowed a fabulously wealthy
elite to live a life of great luxury and leisure, as in sixteenth century Spain,
and in this case to import not only industrialists and technicians from
Western nations to develop and operate the Middle Easts petroleum
industry, but also to import large numbers of workers from various parts of
Asia to serve in a variety of lower-level occupations. Thus neither the elites
nor the masses have had to develop their human capital to the fullest, so that
the Gross Domestic Product per capita in various oil-rich nations of the
Middle East is often lower than in other countries with far less valuable
natural resources.
Conversely, as already noted, the peoples of the temperate zones have
had no choice but to develop their human capital to cope with the
inescapable fact that they cannot grow enough food in the winter to survive,
while people in the tropics have had no winter to cope with. British
historian Arnold Toynbee formulated the thesis that challenge and
response is a key to progress that people who are forced by
circumstances to develop the skills and/or discipline to cope with
surrounding circumstances have tended to create the most advances. Even
with Toynbees caveat that some challenges can be too overwhelming to
produce much progress,8 the idea that large windfall gains can inhibit longterm
progress, by reducing the need to develop human capital, is an idea
that can be worth keeping in mind when trying to assess the economic
effects of culture.
W
Chapter 5
C U LT U R E A N D E C O N O M I C S
Civilization and culture both refer to the overall way of life of a
people, and a civilization is a culture writ large.
Samuel P. Huntington
hen we try to explain differences in economic and other
achievements between nations, races or civilizations, some argue
that these differences are due to innate genetic differences in mental
potential1 and others argue that differences are due to the environments in
which people live. Both seem to assume that all the causes of differences in
achievements fall into just two categories, heredity and environment. In
fact, these terms are often simply defined that way, so that whatever is not
hereditary is called environmental. But does this mean that, for those who
reject genetic determinism, a groups position in American society is
determined by factors peculiar to American society, for which American
society can therefore be praised or blamed, as the case may be?
A vast amount of evidence from around the world suggests otherwise.
GROUP DIFFERENCES
There are many groups with a particular culture of their own, who take
that culture with them wherever they go, in culturally very different kinds
of societies. Germans, for example, have for centuries had both a very
specific set of skills and a very specific way of life, whether they lived in
Germany, Brazil, Russia, Australia or the United States. Cultures include
not only customs, values and attitudes, but also skills and talents that more
directly affect economic outcomes, and which economists call human
capital. Distinguished historian Arnold Toynbee likewise saw the
importance of human capital, though that term had not yet been coined
when he said, in 1915, that the worlds only true wealth was the skill and
nobility and genius of human beings.2 Tangible material wealth is only a
conversion of pre-existing physical material into a form that is more valued
by human beings. The ability to do so is the real wealth.
Among the skills in which Germans have excelled has been the building
of pianos. The first pianos in colonial America were built by Germans, who
also led the way in building pianos in Australia, France, Russia and
England.3 The worlds leading optical firms designing camera lenses in the
first half of the twentieth century were German, including Zeiss, Schneider
and Voigtlnder and the leading optical firm in the United States was
created by two German immigrants named Bausch and Lomb.
Germans have likewise excelled in military skills, literally for millennia.
There were German generals in the Roman legions, as well as German
generals in czarist Russia4 and in South America.5 The United States had
German generals in the Revolutionary War of 1776, and American armies
fighting in Europe in both World War I and World War II were commanded
by generals of German ancestry Pershing a and Eisenhower, respectively.
Other top commanders of American military forces in World War II who
were of German ancestry included Admiral Chester Nimitz, who
commanded the Pacific fleet, and General Carl Spaatz, whose bombers
reduced much of Germany to rubble. During the Middle Ages, the Teutonic
Knights conquered Prussia, which became the heartland of German military
prowess for centuries to come. In both World Wars, the armies of Germany
inflicted far more casualties on opposing forces than the Germans sustained
themselves.6
Social patterns among Germans likewise appeared not only in Germany
but also in other countries around the world, in cultural environments that
differed radically from one another. More was involved than differences in
skills, important as such differences have been. Behind such skills are
cultural values that give a priority to the acquisition of those skills and
new skills as the old ones become obsolete over time, making the mastering
of new skills imperative. In short, the heredity-versus-environment
dichotomy does not exhaust the causes of different productivity in different
groups. The external environment, whether geographic or social, can be an
influence but not predestination. Different groups living in the same
external environment can have very different productivity if their internal
cultural values produce very different priorities as to what they want to do,
and at what sacrifices of other things.
An emphasis on education was a cultural pattern found in Germany
itself, where kindergartens originated and where research universities were
developed that were later imitated in the United States. Nineteenth century
Germany was one of the first European nations to have free and compulsory
education, as well as more teachers per capita than in many other European
countries, and with a higher proportion of the national output being devoted
to education.7
This emphasis on education was also part of the culture of Germans
living in other countries, including countries where the culture of the
majority population had no such commitment to education. The great
majority of Germans living in nineteenth century Russia, for example, were
literate at a time when the great majority of Russians were illiterate.8 In
German farming communities pioneering in the wilderness in nineteenth
century Brazil, schools appeared in the first clearings in the woods,9 while
most native-born Brazilians remained illiterate on into the early twentieth
century.10 In the Austrian Empire in 1900, the illiteracy rate among German
males over the age of ten was 5 percent, while among other males of the
same ages illiteracy was 45 percent among those who were Polish, 67
percent among Serbo-Croatians and 71 percent among Romanians in the
same empire.11
When Czernowitz University was established in nineteenth century
Romania, it had more German students than Romanian students, and most
of its professors were German.12 In Estonia, a university established in 1802
by the czarist government of the Russian Empire likewise had a majority of
Germans among its students and faculty for most of the nineteenth
century.13 In the city of Riga in adjoining Latvia, most of the education was
conducted in the German language, even though Germans were a minority
of the citys population.14
Germans are just one of the groups who have taken their own particular
culture with them when they immigrated to other societies, so that the
general environments of those various other societies were not the
controlling factor in these groups economic or other outcomes in those
societies. How we define environment is crucial. It is not simply a matter
of semantic preferences. If we define environment as simply the
surrounding circumstances, then we are left unable to account for different
cultural groups having very different outcomes in the same environment,
creating among other things disparities in income and wealth.
To account for radical differences in income and wealth among groups
living in the same society, environment can be defined as what is going on
around a group, while culture means what is going on within each group. If
we choose instead to define environment as all non-genetic factors, then the
various cultures of different groups in a given society are included in the
environment of that society. But what we cannot do is go back and forth
between different conceptions of what environment means not if we
expect to reach consistent or rational conclusions.
Many other groups besides Germans have had their own respective
cultures, which they take with them into very different settings around the
world. These would include the overseas Chinese in various Southeast
Asian countries and in the Western Hemisphere;15 the Lebanese in West
Africa, Australia, and North and South America;16 Jews in Europe, the
Middle East, the Western Hemisphere and Australia;17 and the various
peoples of India on every inhabited continent.18
Given the cultural differences that these groups take with them
wherever they go, there is no reason whatever to expect them to have the
same incomes or wealth, either compared to each other or compared to the
existing majority populations of the countries to which they immigrate. Nor
do the empirical data show any such equality. That this is a matter of
culture, rather than a matter of initial wealth upon arriving in a given
country, is shown by how many groups have arrived in various countries far
poorer than the existing population of the host country and have
nevertheless eventually risen above the economic level of those who were
there before them.
The history of the overseas Chinese in the countries of Southeast Asia
as well as in the United States is a classic example of immigrants whose
first wave arrived with little more than the clothes on their backs and a
willingness to work as hard as it took for them to get ahead. Often, in
centuries past, these poverty-stricken emigrants from China had little or no
education and knew little of the language or customs of the countries they
went to.
Seldom did the laws or practices of the Southeast Asian countries in
which the Chinese settled offer them equal rights with either members of
the colonial ruling race or with the indigenous population. In colonial
Malaya, for example, the British provided schools for the children of the
Malays but the Chinese had to provide their own.19 In nineteenth century
America, a long and painfully tragic story can be summarized by saying
that the Chinese were treated even worse than in Southeast Asia.20 In Peru,
guards were posted on an island where Chinese contract laborers were
assigned the task of shovelling bird manure into sacks for export as
fertilizer, working under stifling heat and stench. The guards were not there
to prevent escape from the island, but to prevent the ultimate escape of
suicide.21
The desperate situation of the Chinese in various other countries in the
nineteenth century also led to high rates of suicide among them. These
suicides sometimes began in the Portuguese port of Macao on the coast of
China,22 where many Chinese had been lured or trapped into holding pens
for the semi-slave trade of indentured laborers to be shipped to other
countries around the world including hundreds of thousands to the
Western Hemisphere. Despite being mostly young men in the prime of life,
a majority of those sent to Cuba died under the brutal working conditions
there before completing the eight years of their labor contracts.23 In
nineteenth century Cuba, there were years when more than a hundred
Chinese committed suicide,24 but thousands more were simply worked to
death.
Although most Chinese immigrants to the United States in the
nineteenth century did not come through the Macao indentured labor trade,
circumstances in the United States were sufficiently dire that the suicide
rate of the Chinese in San Francisco, as late as the mid-twentieth century,
was almost three times the national average.25
Over the years and generations, the Chinese in the United States have
become prosperous, overcoming many obstacles, of which those created by
others have not been the only ones. The initial poverty and lack of
education of Chinese immigrants to nineteenth century America was
another problem they had to overcome, and did. Such struggles were not
new to the Chinese who came to America. Of all the Chinese immigrants
who arrived in America before the First World War, most came from
Kwangtung province in China,26 where the bitter struggle for existence in
that over-crowded province had made them industrious.27 Since U.S.
laws had severe restrictions against admissions of immigrants from China
until 1965, these immigrants from Kwangtung (now Guangdong) and their
descendants continued to be the majority of Chinese Americans during that
era.
Poverty has also been a problem for hundreds of thousands of new
Chinese immigrants arriving in the United States as late as the twenty-first
century, whether legally or illegally, from Fujian province in China. Like
other immigrants in other times and places, the Chinese from Fujian have
not scattered randomly across the United States but have concentrated in
their own communities, located 