1
MICHAEL J. SANDEL
What Money Cant Buy
The Moral Limits of Markets
2012
ALLEN LANE an imprint of PENGUIN BOOK
2
Contents
Introduction: Markets and Morals Market Triumphalism Everything for Sale The Role of Markets
Our Rancorous Politics
1. Jumping the Queue Airports, A musement Parks, Car Pool Lanes Hired Line Standers Ticket
Scalpers Concierge Doctors Markets Versus Queues Yosemite Campsites Papal Masses
Springsteen Concerts
2. Incentives Cash for Sterilization The Economic Approach to Life Paying Kids for Good Grades
Bribes to Lose Weight Selling the Right to Immigrate A Market in Refugees Speeding Tickets and
Subway Cheats Tradable Procreation Permits Tradable Pollution Permits Carbon Offsets Paying to
Kill an Endangered Rhino Ethics and Economics
3. How Markets Crowd Out Morals Hired Friends Bought Apologies and Wedding Toasts The Case
Against Gifts Auctioning College Admission Coercion and Corruption Nuclear Waste Sites Donation
Days and Day-Care Pickups Blood for Sale Economizing Love
4. Markets in Life and Death Janitors Insurance Betting on Death Internet Death Pools Insurance
Versus Gambling The Terrorism Futures Market The Lives of Strangers Death Bonds
5. Naming Rights Autographs for Sale Corporate-Sponsored Home Runs Luxury Skyboxes
Moneyball Bathroom Advertising Ads in Books Body Billboards Branding the Public Square
Branded Lifeguards and Nature Trails Police Cars and Fire Hydrants Commercials in the Classroom
3
Introduction: Markets and Morals
There are some things money cant buy, but these days, not many. Today, almost everything
is up for sale. Here are a few examples:
A prison cell upgrade: $82 per night. In Santa Ana, California, and some other cities, nonviolent offenders can pay
for better accommodationsa clean, quiet jail cell, away from the cells for nonpaying prisoners.1
Access to the car pool lane while driving solo: $8 during rush hour. Minneapolis and other cities are trying to ease
traffic congestion by letting solo drivers pay to drive in car pool lanes, at rates that vary according to traffic.2
The services of an Indian surrogate mother to carry a pregnancy: $6,250. Western couples seeking surrogates
increasingly outsource the job to India, where the practice is legal and the price is less than one-third the going
rate in the United States.3
The right to immigrate to the United States: $500,000. Foreigners who invest $500,000 and create at least ten
jobs in an area of high unemployment are eligible for a green card that entitles them to permanent residency.4
The right to shoot an endangered black rhino: $150,000. South Africa has begun letting ranchers sell hunters the
right to kill a limited number of rhinos, to give the ranchers an incentive to raise and protect the endangered
species.5
The cell phone number of your doctor: $1,500 and up per year. A growing number of concierge doctors offer
cell phone access and same-day appointments for patients willing to pay annual fees ranging from $1,500 to
$25,000.6
The right to emit a metric ton of carbon into the atmosphere: 13 (about $18). The European Union runs a
carbon emissions market that enables companies to buy and sell the right to pollute.7
Admission of your child to a prestigious university: ? Although the price is not posted, officials from some top
universities told The Wall Street Journal that they accept some less than stellar students whose parents are
wealthy and likely to make substantial financial contributions.8
Not everyone can afford to buy these things. But today there are lots of new ways to make
money. If you need to earn some extra cash,here are some novel possibilities:
Rent out space on your forehead (or elsewhere on your body) to display commercial advertising: $777. Air New
Zealand hired thirty people to shave their heads and wear temporary tattoos with the slogan Need a change?
Head down to New Zealand.9
Serve as a human guinea pig in a drug safety trial for a pharmaceutical company: $7,500. The pay can be higher
or lower, depending on the invasiveness of the procedure used to test the drugs effect, and the discomfort
involved.10
Fight in Somalia or Afghanistan for a private military company: $250 per month to $1,000 per day. The pay varies
according to qualifications, experience, and nationality.11
Stand in line overnight on Capitol Hill to hold a place for a lobbyist who wants to attend a congressional hearing:
$15$20 per hour. The lobbyists pay line-standing companies, who hire homeless people and others to queue
up.12
If you are a second grader in an underachieving Dallas school, read a book: $2. To encourage reading, the schools
pay kids for each book they read.13
If you are obese, lose fourteen pounds in four months: $378. Companies and health insurers offer financial
incentives for weight loss and other kinds of healthy behavior.14
Buy the life insurance policy of an ailing or elderly person, pay the annual premiums while the person is alive,
and then collect the death benefit when he or she dies: potentially, millions (depending on the policy). This form
of betting on the lives of strangers has become a $30 billion industry. The sooner the stranger dies, the more the
investor makes.15
4
We live at a time when almost everything can be bought and sold. Over the past three
decades, marketsand market valueshave come to govern our lives as never before. We
did not arrive at this condition through any deliberate choice. It is almost as if it came upon
us.
As the cold war ended, markets and market thinking enjoyed unrivaled prestige,
understandably so. No other mechanism for organizing the production and distribution of
goods had proved as successful at generating affluence and prosperity. And yet, even as
growing numbers of countries around the world embraced market mechanisms
in the operation of their economies, something else was happening. Market values were
coming to play a greater and greater role in social life. Economics was becoming an imperial
domain. Today, the logic of buying and selling no longer applies to material goods alone but
increasingly governs the whole of life. It is time to ask whether we want to live this way.
THE ERA OF MARKET TRIUMPHALISM
The years leading up to the financial crisis of 2008 were a heady time of market faith and
deregulationan era of market triumphalism. The era began in the early 1980s, when Ronald
Reagan and Margaret Thatcher proclaimed their conviction that markets, not government,
held the key to prosperity and freedom. And it continued in the 1990s, with the marketfriendly
liberalism of Bill Clinton and Tony Blair, who moderated but consolidated the faith
that markets are the primary means for achieving the public good.
Today, that faith is in doubt. The era of market triumphalism has come to an end. The
financial crisis did more than cast doubt on the ability of markets to allocate risk efficiently. It
also prompted a widespread sense that markets have become detached from morals and that
we need somehow to reconnect them. But its not obvious what this would mean, or how we
should go about it.
Some say the moral failing at the heart of market triumphalism was greed, which led to
irresponsible risk taking. The solution, according to this view, is to rein in greed, insist on
greater integrity and responsibility among bankers and Wall Street executives, and enact
sensible regulations to prevent a similar crisis from happening again.
This is, at best, a partial diagnosis. While it is certainly true that greed played a role in the
financial crisis, something bigger is at stake. The most fateful change that unfolded during the
past three decades was not an increase in greed. It was the expansion of markets, and of
market values, into spheres of life where they dont belong.
To contend with this condition, we need to do more than inveigh against greed; we need to
rethink the role that markets should play in our society. We need a public debate about what
it means to keep markets in their place. To have this debate, we need to think through the
moral limits of markets. We need to ask whether there are some things money should not
buy.
The reach of markets, and market-oriented thinking, into aspects of life traditionally
governed by nonmarket norms is one of the most significant developments of our time.
Consider the proliferation of for-profit schools, hospitals, and prisons, and the outsourcing
of war to private military contractors. (In Iraq and Afghanistan, private contractors actually
outnumbered U.S. military troops.
16??)
Consider the eclipse of public police forces by private security firmsespecially in the
United States and Britain, where the number of private guards is more than twice the number
of public police officers.
5
17??Or consider the pharmaceutical companies aggressive marketing of prescription drugs
to consumers in rich countries. (If youve ever seen the television commercials on the evening
news in the United States, you could be forgiven for thinking that the greatest health crisis in
the world is not malaria or river blindness or sleeping sickness, but a rampant epidemic of
erectile dysfunction.)
Consider too the reach of commercial advertising into public
schools; the sale of naming rights to parks and civic spaces; the marketing of designer
eggs and sperm for assisted reproduction; the outsourcing of pregnancy to surrogate mothers
in the developing world; the buying and selling, by companies and countries, of the right to
pollute; a system of campaign finance that comes close to permitting the buying and selling of
elections.
These uses of markets to allocate health, education, public safety, national security,
criminal justice, environmental protection, recreation, procreation, and other social goods
were for the most part unheard of thirty years ago. Today, we take them largely for granted.
EVERYTHING FOR SALE
Why worry that we are moving toward a society in which everything is up for sale?
For two reasons: one is about inequality; the other is about corruption. Consider inequality.
In a society where everything is for sale, life is harder for those of modest means. The more
money can buy, the more affluence (or the lack of it) matters.
If the only advantage of affluence were the ability to buy yachts, sports cars, and fancy
vacations, inequalities of income and wealth would not matter very much. But as money
comes to buy more and morepolitical influence, good medical care, a home in a safe
neighborhood rather than a crime-ridden one, access to elite schools rather than failing
onesthe distribution of income and wealth looms larger and larger. Where all good things
are bought and sold, having money makes all the difference in the world.
This explains why the last few decades have been especially hard on poor and middle-class
families. Not only has the gap between
rich and poor widened, the commodification of everything has sharpened the sting of
inequality by making money matter more.
The second reason we should hesitate to put everything up for sale is more difficult to
describe. It is not about inequality and fairness but about the corrosive tendency of markets.
Putting a price on the good things in life can corrupt them. Thats because markets dont only
allocate goods; they also express and promote certain attitudes toward the goods being
exchanged. Paying kids to read books might get them to read more, but also teach them to
regard reading as a chore rather than a source of intrinsic satisfaction. Auctioning seats in the
freshman class to the highest bidders might raise revenue but also erode the integrity of the
college and the value of its diploma. Hiring foreign mercenaries to fight our wars might spare
the lives of our citizens but corrupt the meaning of citizenship.
Economists often assume that markets are inert, that they do not affect the goods they
exchange. But this is untrue. Markets leave their mark. Sometimes, market values crowd out
nonmarket values worth caring about.
Of course, people disagree about what values are worth caring about, and why. So to
decide what money shouldand should notbe able to buy, we have to decide what values
should govern the various domains of social and civic life. How to think this through is the
subject of this book.
6
Here is a preview of the answer I hope to offer: when we decide that certain goods may be
bought and sold, we decide, at least implicitly, that it is appropriate to treat them as
commodities, as instruments of profit and use. But not all goods are properly valued in this
way.
18?? The most obvious example is human beings. Slavery was appalling because it treated
human beings as commodities, to be bought and sold at auction. Such treatment fails to value
human beings in
the appropriate wayas persons worthy of dignity and respect, rather than as instruments
of gain and objects of use.
Something similar can be said of other cherished goods and practices. We dont allow
children to be bought and sold on the market. Even if buyers did not mistreat the children
they purchased, a market in children would express and promote the wrong way of valuing
them. Children are not properly regarded as consumer goods but as beings worthy of love
and care. Or consider the rights and obligations of citizenship. If you are called to jury duty,
you may not hire a substitute to take your place. Nor do we allow citizens to sell their votes,
even though others might be eager to buy them. Why not? Because we believe that civic
duties should not be regarded as private property but should be viewed instead as public
responsibilities. To outsource them is to demean them, to value them in the wrong way.
These examples illustrate a broader point: some of the good things in life are corrupted or
degraded if turned into commodities. So to decide where the market belongs, and where it
should be kept at a distance, we have to decide how to value the goods in questionhealth,
education, family life, nature, art, civic duties, and so on. These are moral and political
questions, not merely economic ones. To resolve them, we have to debate, case by case, the
moral meaning of these goods and the proper way of valuing them.
This is a debate we didnt have during the era of market triumphalism. As a result, without
quite realizing it, without ever deciding to do so, we drifted from having a market economy
to being a market society.
The difference is this: A market economy is a toola valuable and effective toolfor
organizing productive activity. A market society is a way of life in which market values seep
into every aspect of
human endeavor. Its a place where social relations are made over in the image of the
market.
The great missing debate in contemporary politics is about the role and reach of markets.
Do we want a market economy, or a market society? What role should markets play in public
life and personal relations? How can we decide which goods should be bought and sold, and
which should be governed by nonmarket values? Where should moneys writ not run?
These are the questions this book seeks to address. Since they touch on contested visions
of the good society and the good life, I cant promise definitive answers. But I hope at least to
prompt public discussion of these questions, and to provide a philosophical framework for
thinking them through.
RETHINKING THE ROLE OF MARKETS
Even if you agree that we need to grapple with big questions about the morality of markets,
you might doubt that our public discourse is up to the task. Its a legitimate worry. Any
attempt to rethink the role and reach of markets should begin by acknowledging two
daunting obstacles.
7
One is the persisting power and prestige of market thinking, even in the aftermath of the
worst market failure in eighty years. The other is the rancor and emptiness of our public
discourse. These two conditions are not entirely unrelated.
The first obstacle is puzzling. At the time, the financial crisis of 2008 was widely seen as a
moral verdict on the uncritical embrace of markets that had prevailed, across the political
spectrum, for three decades. The near collapse of once-mighty Wall Street financial firms,
and the need for a massive bailout at taxpayers expense, seemed sure to prompt a
reconsideration of markets. Even Alan Greenspan, who as chairman of the U.S. Federal
Reserve had served as high priest of the market triumphalist faith, admitted to a state of
shocked disbelief that his confidence in the self-correcting power of free markets turned out
to be mistaken.
19?? The cover of The Economist, the buoyantly pro-market British magazine, showed an
economics textbook melting into a puddle, under the headline WHAT WENT WRONG WITH
ECONOMICS.
20 The era of market triumphalism had come to a devastating end. Now, surely, would be a
time of moral reckoning, a season of sober second thoughts about the market faith. But
things havent turned out that way.
The spectacular failure of financial markets did little to dampen the faith in markets
generally. In fact, the financial crisis discredited government more than the banks. In 2011,
surveys found that the American public blamed the federal government more than Wall
Street financial institutions for the economic problems facing the countryby a margin of
more than two to one.
21??The financial crisis had pitched the United States and much of the global economy into
the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and left millions of people out of
work. Yet it did not prompt a fundamental rethinking of markets. Instead, its most notable
political consequence in the United States was the rise of the Tea Party movement, whose
hostility to government and embrace of free markets would have made Ronald Reagan blush.
In the fall of 2011, the Occupy Wall Street movement brought protests to cities throughout
the United States and around the world. These protests targeted big banks and corporate
power, and the rising inequality of income and wealth. Despite their different ideological
orientations,
both the Tea Party and Occupy Wall Street activists gave voice to populist outrage against
the bailout.
22??Notwithstanding these voices of protest, serious debate about the role and reach of
markets remains largely absent from our political life. Democrats and Republicans argue, as
they long have done, about taxes, spending, and budget deficits, only now with greater
partisanship and little ability to inspire or persuade. Disillusion with politics has deepened as
citizens grow frustrated with a political system unable to act for the public good, or to address
the questions that matter most.
This parlous state of public discourse is the second obstacle to a debate about the moral
limits of markets. At a time when political argument consists mainly of shouting matches on
cable television, partisan vitriol on talk radio, and ideological food fights on the floor of
Congress, its hard to imagine a reasoned public debate about such controversial moral
questions as the right way to value procreation, children, education, health, the environment,
citizenship, and other goods. But I believe such a debate is possible, and that it would
invigorate our public life.
Some see in our rancorous politics a surfeit of moral conviction: too many people believe
too deeply, too stridently, in their own convictions and want to impose them on everyone
8
else. I think this misreads our predicament. The problem with our politics is not too much
moral argument but too little. Our politics is overheated because it is mostly vacant, empty of
moral and spiritual content. It fails to engage with big questions that people care about.
The moral vacancy of contemporary politics has a number of sources. One is the attempt to
banish notions of the good life from public discourse. In hopes of avoiding sectarian strife, we
often insist that citizens leave their moral and spiritual convictions behind
when they enter the public square. But despite its good intention, the reluctance to admit
arguments about the good life into politics prepared the way for market triumphalism and for
the continuing hold of market reasoning.
In its own way, market reasoning also empties public life of moral argument. Part of the
appeal of markets is that they dont pass judgment on the preferences they satisfy. They
dont ask whether some ways of valuing goods are higher, or worthier, than others. If
someone is willing to pay for sex or a kidney, and a consenting adult is willing to sell, the only
question the economist asks is, How much? Markets dont wag fingers. They dont
discriminate between admirable preferences and base ones. Each party to a deal decides for
himself or herself what value to place on the things being exchanged.
This nonjudgmental stance toward values lies at the heart of market reasoning and explains
much of its appeal. But our reluctance to engage in moral and spiritual argument, together
with our embrace of markets, has exacted a heavy price: it has drained public discourse of
moral and civic energy, and contributed to the technocratic, managerial politics that afflicts
many societies today.
A debate about the moral limits of markets would enable us to decide, as a society, where
markets serve the public good and where they dont belong. It would also invigorate our
politics, by welcoming competing notions of the good life into the public square. For how else
could such arguments proceed? If you agree that buying and selling certain goods corrupts or
degrades them, then you must believe that some ways of valuing these goods are more
appropriate than others. It hardly makes sense to speak of corrupting an activity
parenthood, say, or citizenshipunless you think that some ways of being a parent, or a
citizen, are better than others.
Moral judgments such as these lie behind the few limitations
on markets we still observe. We dont allow parents to sell their children or citizens to sell
their votes. And one of the reasons we dont is, frankly, judgmental: we believe that selling
these things values them in the wrong way and cultivates bad attitudes.
Thinking through the moral limits of markets makes these questions unavoidable. It
requires that we reason together, in public, about how to value the social goods we prize. It
would be folly to expect that a morally more robust public discourse, even at its best, would
lead to agreement on every contested question. But it would make for a healthier public life.
And it would make us more aware of the price we pay for living in a society where everything
is up for sale.
When we think of the morality of markets, we think first of Wall Street banks and their
reckless misdeeds, of hedge funds and bailouts and regulatory reform. But the moral and
political challenge we face today is more pervasive and more mundaneto rethink the role
and reach of markets in our social practices, human relationships, and everyday lives.
9
Jumping the Queue
Nobody likes to wait in line. Sometimes you can pay to jump the queue. Its long been known
that, in fancy restaurants, a handsome tip to the matre d can shorten the wait on a busy
night. Such tips are quasi bribes and handled discreetly. No sign in the window announces
immediate seating for anyone willing to slip the host a fifty-dollar bill. But in recent years,
selling the right to cut in line has come out of the shadows and become a familiar practice.
FAST TRACK
Long lines at airport security checkpoints make air travel an ordeal. But not everyone has to
wait in the serpentine queues. Those who buy first-class or business-class tickets can use
priority lanes that take them to the front of the line for screening. British Airways calls it Fast
Track, a service that also lets high-paying passengers jump the queue at passport and
immigration control.
1??But most people cant afford to fly first-class, so the airlines have begun offering coach
passengers the chance to buy line-cutting
privileges as an  la carte perk. For an extra $39, United Airlines will sell you priority
boarding for your flight from Denver to Boston, along with the right to cut in line at the
security checkpoint. In Britain, Londons Luton Airport offers an even more affordable fasttrack
option: wait in the long security line or pay 3 (about $5) and go to the head of the
queue.
2??Critics complain that a fast track through airport security should not be for sale. Security
checks, they argue, are a matter of national defense, not an amenity like extra legroom or
early boarding privileges; the burden of keeping terrorists off airplanes should be shared
equally by all passengers. The airlines reply that everyone is subjected to the same level of
screening; only the wait varies by price. As long as everyone receives the same body scan,
they maintain, a shorter wait in the security line is a convenience they should be free to sell.
3??Amusement parks have also started selling the right to jump the queue. Traditionally,
visitors may spend hours waiting in line for the most popular rides and attractions. Now,
Universal Studios Hollywood and other theme parks offer a way to avoid the wait: for about
twice the price of standard admission, theyll sell you a pass that lets you go to the head of
the line. Expedited access to the Revenge of the Mummy thrill ride may be morally less
freighted than privileged access to an airport security check. Still, some observers lament the
practice, seeing it as corrosive of a wholesome civic habit: Gone are the days when the
theme-park queue was the great equalizer, one commentator wrote, where every
vacationing family waited its turn in democratic fashion.
4??Interestingly, amusement parks often obscure the special privileges they sell. To avoid
offending ordinary customers, some parks
usher their premium guests through back doors and separate gates; others provide an
escort to ease the way of VIP guests as they cut in line. This need for discretion suggests that
paid line cuttingeven in an amusement parktugs against a nagging sense that fairness
means waiting your turn. But no such reticence appears on Universals online ticket site,
which touts the $149 Front of Line Pass with unmistakable bluntness: Cut to the FRONT at all
rides, shows and attractions!
5??If youre put off by queue jumping at amusement parks, you might opt instead for a
10
traditional tourist sight, such as the Empire State Building. For $22 ($16 for children), you can
ride the elevator to the eighty-sixth-floor observatory and enjoy a spectacular view of New
York City. Unfortunately, the site attracts several million visitors a year, and the wait for the
elevator can sometimes take hours. So the Empire State Building now offers a fast track of its
own. For $45 per person, you can buy an Express Pass that lets you cut in linefor both the
security check and the elevator ride. Shelling out $180 for a family of four may seem a steep
price for a fast ride to the top. But as the ticketing website points out, the Express Pass is a
fantastic opportunity to make the most of your time in New Yorkand the Empire State
Buildingby skipping the lines and going straight to the greatest views.
6??LEXUS LANES
The fast-track trend can also be seen on freeways across the United States. Increasingly,
commuters can buy their way out of bumper-to-bumper traffic and into a fast-moving express
lane. It began during
the 1980s with car pool lanes. Many states, hoping to reduce traffic congestion and air
pollution, created express lanes for commuters willing to share a ride. Solo drivers caught
using the car pool lanes faced hefty fines. Some put blow-up dolls in the passenger seat in
hopes of fooling the highway patrol. In an episode of the television comedy Curb Your
Enthusiasm, Larry David comes up with an ingenious way of buying access to the car pool
lane: faced with heavy freeway traffic en route to an LA Dodgers baseball game, he hires a
prostitutenot to have sex but to ride in his car on the way to the stadium. Sure enough, the
quick ride in the car pool lane gets him there in time for the first pitch.
7??Today, many commuters can do the samewithout the need for hired help. For fees of up
to $10 during rush hour, solo drivers can buy the right to use car pool lanes. San Diego,
Minneapolis, Houston, Denver, Miami, Seattle, and San Francisco are among the cities that
now sell the right to a faster commute. The toll typically varies according to the trafficthe
heavier the traffic, the higher the fee. (In most places, cars with two or more occupants can
still use express lanes for free.) On the Riverside Freeway, east of Los Angeles, rush-hour
traffic creeps along at 1520 miles an hour in the free lanes, while the paying customers in
the express lane zip by at 6065 mph.
8??Some people object to the idea of selling the right to jump the queue. They argue that
the proliferation of fast-track schemes adds to the advantages of affluence and consigns the
poor to the back of the line. Opponents of paid express lanes call them Lexus lanes and say
they are unfair to commuters of modest means. Others disagree. They argue that there is
nothing wrong with charging more for faster service. Federal Express charges a premium for
overnight delivery. The local dry cleaner charges extra for same-day service.
And yet no one complains that its unfair for FedEx, or the dry cleaner, to deliver your
parcel or launder your shirts ahead of someone elses.
To an economist, long lines for goods and services are wasteful and inefficient, a sign that
the price system has failed to align supply and demand. Letting people pay for faster service
at airports, at amusement parks, and on highways improves economic efficiency by letting
people put a price on their time.
THE LINE-STANDING BUSINESS
Even where youre not allowed to buy your way to the head of the line, you can sometimes
hire someone else to queue up on your behalf. Each summer, New York Citys Public Theater
puts on free outdoor Shakespeare performances in Central Park. Tickets for the evening
11
performances are made available at 1:00 p.m., and the line forms hours in advance. In 2010,
when Al Pacino starred as Shylock in The Merchant of Venice, demand for tickets was
especially intense.
Many New Yorkers were eager to see the play but didnt have time to stand in line. As the
New York Daily News reported, this predicament gave rise to a cottage industrypeople
offering to wait in line to secure tickets for those willing to pay for the convenience. The line
standers advertised their services on Craigslist and other websites. In exchange for queuing
up and enduring the wait, they were able to charge their busy clients as much as $125 per
ticket for the free performances.
9??The theater tried to prevent the paid line standers from plying their trade, claiming its
not in the spirit of Shakespeare in the Park. The mission of the Public Theater, a publicly
subsidized,
nonprofit enterprise, is to make great theater accessible to a broad audience drawn from
all walks of life. Andrew Cuomo, New Yorks attorney general at the time, pressured Craigslist
to stop running ads for the tickets and line-standing services. Selling tickets that are meant
to be free, he stated, deprives New Yorkers of enjoying the benefits that this taxpayersupported
institution provides.
10??Central Park is not the only place where theres money to be made by those who stand
and wait. In Washington, D.C., the line-standing business is fast becoming a fixture of
government. When congressional committees hold hearings on proposed legislation, they
reserve some seats for the press and make others available to the general public on a firstcome,
first-served basis. Depending on the subject and the size of the room, the lines for the
hearings can form a day or more in advance, sometimes in the rain or in the chill of winter.
Corporate lobbyists are keen to attend these hearings, in order to chat up lawmakers during
breaks and keep track of legislation affecting their industries. But the lobbyists are loath to
spend hours in line to assure themselves a seat. Their solution: pay thousands of dollars to
professional line-standing companies that hire people to queue up for them.
The line-standing companies recruit retirees, message couriers, and, increasingly, homeless
people to brave the elements and hold a place in the queue. The line standers wait outside,
then, as the line moves, they proceed inside the halls of the congressional office buildings,
queuing up outside the hearing rooms. Shortly before the hearing begins, the well-heeled
lobbyists arrive, trade places with their scruffily attired stand-ins, and claim their seats in the
hearing room.
11??The line-standing companies charge the lobbyists $36 to $60 per hour for the queuing
service, which means that getting a seat in a
committee hearing can cost $1,000 or more. The line standers themselves are paid $10
$20 per hour. The Washington Post has editorialized against the practice, calling it
demeaning to Congress and contemptuous of the public. Senator Claire McCaskill, a
Missouri Democrat, has tried to ban it, without success. The notion that special interest
groups can buy seats at congressional hearings like they would buy tickets to a concert or
football game is offensive to me, she said.
12??The business has recently expanded from Congress to the U.S. Supreme Court. When
the Court hears oral arguments in big constitutional cases, its not easy to get in. But if youre
willing to pay, you can hire a line stander to get you a ringside seat in the highest court in the
land.
13??The company
LineStanding.com?? describes itself as a leader in the Congressional line standing
business. When Senator McCaskill proposed legislation to prohibit the practice, Mark Gross,
12
the owner of the company, defended it. He compared line standing to the division of labor on
Henry Fords assembly line: Each worker on the line was responsible for his/her specific
task. Just as lobbyists are good at attending hearings and analyzing all the testimony, and
senators and congressmen are good at making an informed decision, line standers are good
at, well, waiting. Division of labor makes America a great place to work, Gross claimed.
Linestanding may seem like a strange practice, but its ultimately an honest job in a freemarket
economy.
14??Oliver Gomes, a professional line stander, agrees. He was living in a homeless shelter
when he was recruited for the job. CNN interviewed him as he held a place in line for a
lobbyist at a hearing on climate change. Sitting in the halls of Congress made me feel a little
better, Gomes told CNN. It elevated me and made me feel like,
well, you know, maybe I do belong here, maybe I can contribute even at that little minute
level.
15??But opportunity for Gomes meant frustration for some environmentalists. When a
group of them showed up for the climate change hearing, they couldnt get in. The lobbyists
paid stand-ins had already staked out all the available seats in the hearing room.
16?? Of course, it might be argued that if the environmentalists cared enough about
attending the hearing, they too could have queued up overnight. Or they could have hired
homeless people to do it for them.
TICKET SCALPING DOCTOR APPOINTMENTS
Queuing for pay is not only an American phenomenon. Recently, while visiting China, I
learned that the line-standing business has become routine at top hospitals in Beijing. The
market reforms of the last two decades have resulted in funding cuts for public hospitals and
clinics, especially in rural areas. So patients from the countryside now journey to the major
public hospitals in the capital, creating long lines in registration halls. They queue up
overnight, sometimes for days, to get an appointment ticket to see a doctor.
17??The appointment tickets are a bargainonly 14 yuan (about $2). But it isnt easy to get
one. Rather than camp out for days and nights in the queue, some patients, desperate for an
appointment, buy tickets from scalpers. The scalpers make a business of the yawning gap
between supply and demand. They hire people to line up for appointment tickets and then
resell the tickets for hundreds of dollarsmore than a typical peasant makes in months.
Appointments to see leading specialists are especially prizedand hawked by the scalpers as
if they were box seats for the World Series. The Los Angeles
Times described the ticket-scalping scene outside the registration hall of a Beijing hospital:
Dr. Tang. Dr. Tang. Who wants a ticket for Dr. Tang? Rheumatology and immunology.
18??There is something distasteful about scalping tickets to see a doctor. For one thing, the
system rewards unsavory middlemen rather than those who provide the care. Dr. Tang could
well ask why, if a rheumatology appointment is worth $100, most of the money should go to
scalpers rather than to him, or his hospital. Economists might agree and advise hospitals to
raise their prices. In fact, some Beijing hospitals have added special ticket windows, where the
appointments are more expensive and the lines much shorter.
19?? This high-priced ticket window is the hospitals version of the no-wait premium pass at
amusement parks or the fast-track lane at the airporta chance to pay to jump the queue.
But regardless of who cashes in on the excess demand, the scalpers or the hospital, the fast
track to the rheumatologist raises a more basic question: Should patients be able to jump the
queue for medical care simply because they can afford to pay extra?
13
The scalpers and special ticket windows at Beijing hospitals raise this question vividly. But
the same question can be asked of a subtler form of queue jumping increasingly practiced in
the U.S.the rise of concierge doctors.
CONCIERGE DOCTORS
Although U.S. hospitals are not thronged with scalpers, medical care often involves a lot of
waiting. Doctor appointments have to be scheduled weeks, sometimes months, in advance.
When you show up for the appointment, you may have to cool your heels in the
waiting room, only to spend a hurried ten or fifteen minutes with the doctor. The reason:
Insurance companies dont pay primary care doctors much for routine appointments. So to
make a decent living, physicians in general practice have rosters of three thousand patients or
more, and often rush through twenty-five to thirty appointments per day.
20??Many patients and doctors are frustrated with this system, which leaves little time for
doctors to get to know their patients or to answer their questions. So a growing number of
physicians now offer a more attentive form of care known as concierge medicine. Like the
concierge at a five-star hotel, the concierge physician is at your service around the clock. For
annual fees ranging from $1,500 to $25,000, patients are assured of same-day or next-day
appointments, no waiting, leisurely consultations, and twenty-four-hour access to the doctor
by email and cell phone. And if you need to see a top specialist, your concierge doctor will
pave the way.
21??To provide this attentive service, concierge physicians sharply reduce the number of
patients they care for. Physicians who decide to convert their practice into a concierge service
send a letter to their existing patients offering a choice: sign up for the new, no-wait service
for an annual retainer fee, or find another doctor.
22??One of the first concierge practices, and one of the priciest, is MD2 (MD Squared),
founded in 1996 in Seattle. For a fee of $15,000 per year for an individual ($25,000 for a
family), the company promises absolute, unlimited and exclusive access to your personal
physician.
23?? Each doctor serves only fifty families. As the company explains on its website, the
availability and level of service we provide absolutely necessitates that we limit our practice
to a select few.
24?? An article in Town & Country magazine reports that the MD2 waiting room looks more
like the lobby of a Ritz-Carlton than a
clinical doctors office. But few patients even go there. Most are CEOs and business
owners who dont want to lose an hour out of their day to go to the doctors office and prefer
instead to receive care in the privacy of their home or office.
25??Other concierge practices cater to the upper middle class. MDVIP, a for-profit concierge
chain based in Florida, offers same-day appointments and prompt service (answering your call
by the second ring) for $1,500 to $1,800 per year, and accepts insurance payments for
standard medical procedures. Participating physicians cut their patient rolls to six hundred,
enabling them to spend more time with each patient.
26?? The company assures patients that waiting will not be a part of their health care
experience. According to The New York Times, an MDVIP practice in Boca Raton sets out
fruit salad and sponge cake in the waiting room. But since there is little if any waiting, the
food often goes untouched.
27??For concierge doctors and their paying customers, concierge care is everything medicine
should be. Doctors can see eight to twelve patients a day, rather than thirty, and still come
14
out ahead financially. Physicians affiliated with MDVIP keep two-thirds of the annual fee (onethird
goes to the company), which means a practice with six hundred patients makes
$600,000 per year in retainer fees alone, not counting reimbursements from insurance
companies. For patients who can afford it, unhurried appointments and round-the-clock
access to a doctor are luxuries worth paying for.
28??The drawback, of course, is that concierge care for a few depends on shunting everyone
else onto the crowded rolls of other doctors.
29?? It therefore invites the same objection leveled against all fast-track schemes: that its
unfair to those left languishing in the slow lane.
Concierge medicine differs, to be sure, from the special ticket windows and the
appointment-scalping system in Beijing. Those
who cant afford a concierge doc can generally find decent care elsewhere, while those
who cant afford a scalper in Beijing are consigned to days and nights of waiting.
But the two systems have this in common: each enables the affluent to jump the queue for
medical care. The queue jumping is more brazen in Beijing than in Boca Raton. There seems a
world of difference between the clamor of the crowded registration hall and the calm of the
waiting room with the uneaten sponge cake. But thats only because, by the time the
concierge patient arrives for his or her appointment, the culling of the queue has already
taken place, out of view, by the imposition of the fee.
MARKET REASONING
The stories weve just considered are signs of the times. In airports and amusement parks, in
the corridors of Congress and the waiting rooms of doctors, the ethic of the queuefirst
come, first-servedis being displaced by the ethic of the marketyou get what you pay
for.
And this shift reflects something biggerthe growing reach of money and markets into
spheres of life once governed by nonmarket norms.
Selling the right to cut in line is not the most grievous instance of this trend. But thinking
through the rights and wrongs of line standing, ticket scalping, and other forms of queue
jumping can help us glimpse the moral forceand moral limitsof market reasoning.
Is there anything wrong with hiring people to stand in line, or with scalping tickets? Most
economists say no. They have little sympathy for the ethic of the queue. If I want to hire a
homeless person to queue up on my behalf, they ask, why should anyone complain? If Id
rather sell my ticket than use it, why should I be prevented from doing so?
The case for markets over queues draws on two arguments. One is about respecting
individual freedom; the other is about maximizing welfare, or social utility. The first is a
libertarian argument. It maintains that people should be free to buy and sell whatever they
please, as long as they dont violate anyones rights. Libertarians oppose laws against ticket
scalping for the same reason they oppose laws against prostitution, or the sale of human
organs: they believe such laws violate individual liberty, by interfering with the choices made
by consenting adults.
The second argument for markets, more familiar among economists, is utilitarian. It says
that market exchanges benefit buyers and sellers alike, thereby improving our collective wellbeing,
or social utility. The fact that my line stander and I strike a deal proves that we are both
better off as a result. Paying $125 to see the Shakespeare play without having to wait in line
must make me better off; otherwise I wouldnt have hired the line stander. And earning $125
by spending hours in a queue must make the line stander better off; otherwise he or she
15
wouldnt have taken the job. We are both better off as a result of our exchange; our utility
increases. This is what economists mean when they say that free markets allocate goods
efficiently. By allowing people to make mutually advantageous trades, markets allocate goods
to those who value them most highly, as measured by their willingness to pay.
My colleague Greg Mankiw, an economist, is the author of one of the most widely used
economics textbooks in the United States. He uses the example of ticket scalping to illustrate
the virtues of the free market. First, he explains that economic efficiency means allocating
goods in a way that maximizes the economic well-being of everyone in society. He then
observes that free markets contribute to this goal by allocating the supply of goods to the
buyers who value them most highly, as measured by their willingness to pay.
30 Consider ticket scalpers: If an economy is to allocate its scarce resources efficiently,
goods must get to those consumers who value them most highly. Ticket scalping is one
example of how markets reach efficient outcomes  By charging the highest price the market
will bear, scalpers help ensure that consumers with the greatest willingness to pay for the
tickets actually do get them.
31 If the free-market argument is correct, ticket scalpers and line-standing companies should
not be vilified for violating the integrity of the queue; they should be praised for improving
social utility by making underpriced goods available to those most willing to pay for them.
MARKETS VERSUS QUEUES
What, then, is the case for the ethic of the queue? Why try to banish paid line standers and
ticket scalpers from Central Park or Capitol Hill? A spokesperson for Shakespeare in the Park
offered the following rationale: They are taking a spot away and a ticket away from someone
who wants to be there and is eager to see a production of Shakespeare in the Park. We want
people to have that experience for free.
32??The first part of the argument is flawed. Hired line standers do not reduce the total
number of people who see the performance; they only change who sees it. Its true, as the
spokesperson claims, that the line standers take tickets that would otherwise go to people
farther back in the queue who are eager to see the play. But those who wind up with those
tickets are also eager to see the play. Thats why they shell out $125 to hire a line stander.
What the spokesperson probably meant is that ticket scalping is unfair to those who cant
afford the $125. It puts ordinary folks at a disadvantage and makes it harder for them to get
tickets. This is a stronger argument. When a line stander or scalper gets a ticket, someone
behind him or her in the queue loses out, someone who may be unable to afford the scalpers
price.
Free-market advocates might reply as follows: If the theater really wants to fill its seats
with people eager to see the play and to maximize the pleasure its performances give, then it
should want tickets to go to those who value them most highly. And those are the people
who will pay most for a ticket. So the best way to pack the house with an audience that will
derive the greatest pleasure from the play is to let the free market operateeither by selling
tickets for whatever price the market will bear, or by allowing line standers and scalpers to
sell to the highest bidders. Getting tickets to those willing to pay the highest price for them is
the best way of determining who most values a Shakespeare performance.
But this argument is unconvincing. Even if your goal is to maximize social utility, free
markets may not do so more reliably than queues. The reason is that the willingness to pay
for a good does not show who values it most highly. This is because market prices reflect the
ability as well as the willingness to pay. Those who most want to see Shakespeare, or the Red
16
Sox, may be unable to afford a ticket. And in some cases, those who pay the most for tickets
may not value the experience very highly at all.
Ive noticed, for example, that the people sitting in the expensive
seats at the ballpark often show up late and leave early. This makes me wonder how much
they care about baseball. Their ability to afford seats behind home plate may have more to do
with the depth of their pockets than their passion for the game. They certainly dont care as
much as some fans, especially young ones, who cant afford box seats but who can tell you
the batting average of every player in the starting lineup. Since market prices reflect the
ability as well as the willingness to pay, they are imperfect indicators of who most values a
particular good.
This is a familiar point, even an obvious one. But it casts doubt on the economists claim
that markets are always better than queues at getting goods to those who value them most
highly. In some cases, the willingness to stand in linefor theater tickets or for the ball
gamemay be a better indicator of who really wants to attend than the willingness to pay.
Defenders of ticket scalping complain that queuing discriminates in favor of people who
have the most free time.
33?? Thats true, but only in the same sense that markets discriminate in favor of people
who have the most money. As markets allocate goods based on the ability and willingness to
pay, queues allocate goods based on the ability and willingness to wait. And there is no
reason to assume that the willingness to pay for a good is a better measure of its value to a
person than the willingness to wait.
So the utilitarian case for markets over queues is highly contingent. Sometimes markets do
get goods to those who value them most highly; other times, queues may do so. Whether, in
any given case, markets or queues do this job better is an empirical question, not a matter
that can be resolved in advance by abstract economic reasoning.
MARKETS AND CORRUPTION
But the utilitarian argument for markets over queues is open to a further, more fundamental
objection: utilitarian considerations are not the only ones that matter. Certain goods have
value in ways that go beyond the utility they give individual buyers and sellers. How a good is
allocated may be part of what makes it the kind of good it is.
Think again about the Public Theaters free summer Shakespeare performances. We want
people to have that experience for free, said the spokesperson, explaining the theaters
opposition to hired line standers. But why? How would the experience be diminished if tickets
were bought and sold? It would be diminished, of course, for those whod like to see the play
but cant afford a ticket. But fairness is not the only thing at stake. Something is lost when
free public theater is turned into a market commodity, something beyond the disappointment
experienced by those who are priced out of attending.
The Public Theater sees its free outdoor performances as a public festival, a kind of civic
celebration. It is, so to speak, a gift the city gives itself. Of course, seating is not unlimited; the
entire city cannot attend on any given evening. But the idea is to make Shakespeare freely
available to everyone, without regard to the ability to pay. Charging for admission, or allowing
scalpers to profit from what is meant to be a gift, is at odds with this end. It changes a public
festival into a business, a tool for private gain. It would be as if the city made people pay to
watch the fireworks on the Fourth of July.
17
Similar considerations explain whats wrong with paid line standing on Capitol Hill. One
objection is about fairness: its unfair that wealthy lobbyists can corner the market on
congressional hearings, depriving ordinary citizens of the opportunity to attend.
But unequal access is not the only troubling aspect of this practice. Suppose lobbyists were
taxed when they hired line-standing companies, and the proceeds were used to make linestanding
services affordable for ordinary citizens. The subsidies might take the form, say, of
vouchers redeemable for discounted rates at line-standing companies. Such a scheme might
ease the unfairness of the present system. But a further objection would remain: turning
access to Congress into a product for sale demeans and degrades it.
From an economic point of view, allowing free access to congressional hearings
underprices the good, giving rise to queues. The line-standing industry remedies this
inefficiency by establishing a market price. It allocates seats in the hearing room to those who
are willing to pay the most for them. But this values the good of representative government
in the wrong way.
We can see this more clearly if we ask why Congress underprices admission to its
deliberations in the first place. Suppose, striving mightily to reduce the national debt,
Congress decided to charge admission to its hearings$1,000, say, for a front-row seat at the
Appropriations Committee. Many people would object, not only on the grounds that the
admission fee is unfair to those unable to afford it but also on the grounds that charging the
public to attend a congressional hearing is a kind of corruption.
We often associate corruption with ill-gotten gains. But corruption refers to more than
bribes and illicit payments. To corrupt a good or a social practice is to degrade it, to treat it
according to a lower mode of valuation than is appropriate to it. Charging admission to
congressional hearings is a form of corruption in this sense. It treats Congress as if it were a
business rather than an institution of representative government.
Cynics might reply that Congress is already a business, in that it
routinely sells influence and favors to special interests. So why not acknowledge this openly
and charge admission? The answer is that the lobbying, influence peddling, and self-dealing
that already afflict Congress are also instances of corruption. They represent the degradation
of government in the public interest. Implicit in any charge of corruption is a conception of
the purposes and ends an institution (in this case, Congress) properly pursues. The linestanding
industry on Capitol Hill, an extension of the lobbying industry, is corrupt in this
sense. It is not illegal, and the payments are made openly. But it degrades Congress by
treating it as a source of private gain rather than an instrument of the public good.
WHATS WRONG WITH TICKET SCALPING?
Why do some instances of paid queue jumping, line standing, and ticket scalping strike us as
objectionable, while others do not? The reason is that market values are corrosive of certain
goods but appropriate to others. Before we can decide whether a good should be allocated by
markets, queues, or in some other way, we have to decide what kind of good it is and how it
should be valued.
Figuring this out is not always easy. Consider three examples of underpriced goods that
have recently given rise to ticket scalping: campsites at Yosemite National Park, open-air
masses conducted by Pope Benedict XVI, and live concerts by Bruce Springsteen.
Scalping Campsites at Yosemite
18
Yosemite National Park, in California, attracts more than four million visitors a year. About
nine hundred of its prime campsites can
be reserved in advance, at a nominal cost of $20 per night. The reservations can be booked,
by telephone or online, beginning at 7:00 a.m. on the fifteenth of each month, up to five
months in advance. But its not easy to get one. Demand is so intense, especially for the
summer, that the campsites are fully booked within minutes of becoming available.
In 2011, however, The Sacramento Bee reported that ticket scalpers were offering
Yosemite campsites for sale on Craigslist for $100 to $150 per night. The National Park
Service, which prohibits the resale of reservations, was flooded with complaints about the
scalpers and tried to prevent the illicit trade.
34?? According to standard market logic, its not clear why it should: If the National Park
Service wants to maximize the welfare society derives from Yosemite, it should want the
campsites to be used by those who most value the experience, as measured by their
willingness to pay. So rather than try to defeat the scalpers, it should welcome them. Or it
should raise the price it charges for campsite reservations to the market-clearing price and
eliminate the excess demand.
But the public outrage over the scalping of Yosemite campsites rejects this market logic.
The newspaper that broke the story ran an editorial condemning the scalpers under the
headline SCALPERS STRIKE YOSEMITE PARK: IS NOTHING SACRED? It saw the scalping as a scam to be
prevented, not as a service to social utility. The wonders of Yosemite belong to all of us, the
editorial stated, not just those who can afford to fork over extra cash to a scalper.
35??Underlying the hostility to scalping campsites at Yosemite are actually two objections
one about fairness, the other about the proper way of valuing a national park. The first
objection worries that scalping is unfair to people of modest means, who cant afford to pay
$150
a night for a campsite. The second objection, implied by the editorials rhetorical question
(Is nothing sacred?) draws on the idea that some things should not be up for sale. According
to this idea, national parks are not merely objects of use or sources of social utility. They are
places of natural wonder and beauty, worthy of appreciation, even awe. For scalpers to
auction access to such places seems a kind of sacrilege.
Papal Masses for Sale
Here is another example of market values colliding with a sacred good: When Pope Benedict
XVI made his first visit to the United States, demand for tickets to his stadium masses in New
York City and Washington, D.C., far exceeded the supply of seatseven in Yankee Stadium.
Free tickets were distributed through Catholic dioceses and local parishes. When the
inevitable ticket scalping ensuedone ticket sold online for more than $200church officials
condemned it on the grounds that access to a religious rite should not be bought and sold.
There shouldnt be a market in tickets, a church spokeswoman said. You cant pay to
celebrate a sacrament.
36??Those who bought tickets from scalpers might disagree. They succeeded in paying to
celebrate a sacrament. But the church spokeswoman was trying, I think, to make a different
point: although it may be possible to gain admission to a papal mass by buying a ticket from a
scalper, the spirit of the sacrament is tainted if the experience is up for sale. Treating religious
rituals, or natural wonders, as marketable commodities is a failure of respect. Turning sacred
goods into instruments of profit values them in the wrong way.
The Market for Springsteen
19
But what of an event that is partly a commercial enterprise and partly something else? In
2009, Bruce Springsteen performed two concerts in his home state of New Jersey. He set the
highest ticket price at $95, even though he could have charged much more and still filled the
arena. This price restraint led to rampant ticket scalping and deprived Springsteen of a lot of
money. The Rolling Stones had recently charged $450 for the best seats on their concert tour.
Economists who studied ticket prices at an earlier Springsteen concert found that, by charging
less than the market price, he had forgone about $4 million that evening.
37??So why not charge the market price? For Springsteen, keeping ticket prices relatively
affordable is a way of keeping faith with his working-class fans. It is also a way of expressing a
certain understanding of what his concerts are about. They are moneymaking ventures, to be
sure, but only in part. They are also celebratory events whose success depends on the
character and composition of the crowd. The performance consists not only in the songs but
also in the relationship between the performer and his audience, and the spirit in which they
gather.
In a New Yorker article on the economics of rock concerts, John Seabrook points out that
live concerts are not thoroughgoing commodities, or market goods; to treat them as if they
were is to diminish them: Records are commodities; concerts are social events, and in trying
to make a commodity out of the live experience you risk spoiling the experience altogether.
He quotes Alan Krueger, an economist who has studied the pricing of Springsteen concerts:
There is still an element of rock concerts that is more like a party than a commodities
market. A ticket to a Springsteen concert,
Krueger explained, is not only a market good. It is in some respects a gift. If Springsteen
charged as much as the market would bear, he would undermine the gift relation with his
fans.
38??Some may see this as mere public relations, a strategy to forgo some revenue today to
preserve goodwill and maximize earnings in the long term. But this is not the only way to
make sense of it. Springsteen may believe, and be right to believe, that to treat his live
performance as a purely market good would be to demean it, to value it in the wrong way. In
this respect at least, he may have something in common with Pope Benedict.
THE ETHIC OF THE QUEUE
Weve considered several ways of paying to cut in line: hiring line standers, buying tickets
from scalpers, or purchasing line-cutting privileges directly from, say, an airline or an
amusement park. Each of these transactions supplants the ethic of the queue (waiting your
turn) with the ethic of the market (paying a price for faster service).
Markets and queuespaying and waitingare two different ways of allocating things, and
each is appropriate to different activities. The ethic of the queue, First come, first served,
has an egalitarian appeal. It bids us to ignore privilege, power, and deep pocketsat least for
certain purposes. Wait your turn, we were admonished as children. Dont cut in line.
The principle seems apt on playgrounds, at bus stops, and when theres a line for the public
restroom at a theater or ballpark. We resent people cutting in front of us. If someone with an
urgent need asks to jump the queue, most people will oblige. But wed consider it odd if
someone at the back of the line offered us $10 to trade
placesor if the management set up express pay toilets alongside the free ones, to
accommodate affluent customers (or desperate ones).
20
But the ethic of the queue does not govern all occasions. If I put my house up for sale, Im
under no obligation to accept the first offer that comes along, simply because its the first.
Selling my house and waiting for a bus are different activities, properly governed by different
norms. Theres no reason to assume that any single principlequeuing or payingshould
determine the allocation of all goods.
Sometimes norms change, and it is unclear which principle should prevail. Think of the
recorded message you hear, played over and over, as you wait on hold when calling your
bank, HMO, or cable television provider: Your call will be answered in the order in which it
was received. This is the essence of the ethic of the queue. Its as if the company is trying to
soothe our impatience with the balm of fairness.
But dont take that recorded message too seriously. Today, some peoples calls are
answered faster than others. You might call it telephonic queue jumping. Growing numbers of
banks, airlines, and credit card companies provide special phone numbers to their best
customers or route their calls to elite call centers for prompt attention. Call center technology
enables companies to score incoming calls and to give faster service to those that come
from affluent places. Delta Airlines recently proposed giving frequent flyers a controversial
perk: the option of paying $5 extra to speak to a customer service agent in the United States,
rather than be routed to a call center in India. Public disapproval led Delta to abandon the
idea.
39??Is there anything wrong with answering the calls of your best (or most promising)
customers first? It depends on the kind of good youre selling. Are they calling about an
overdraft fee or an appendectomy?
Of course, markets and queues are not the only ways of allocating things. Some goods we
distribute by merit, others by need, still others by lottery or chance. Universities typically
admit students with the greatest talent and promise, not those who apply first or offer the
most money for a place in the freshman class. Hospital emergency rooms treat patients
according to the urgency of their condition, not according to the order of their arrival or their
willingness to pay extra to be seen first. Jury duty is allocated by lottery; if you are called to
serve, you cant hire someone else to take your place.
The tendency of markets to displace queues, and other nonmarket ways of allocating
goods, so pervades modern life that we scarcely notice it anymore. It is striking that most of
the paid queue-jumping schemes weve consideredat airports and amusement parks, at
Shakespeare festivals and congressional hearings, in call centers and doctors offices, on
freeways and in national parksare recent developments, scarcely imaginable three decades
ago. The demise of the queue in these domains may seem a quaint concern. But these are not
the only places that markets have invaded.
21
Incentives
CASH FOR STERILIZATION
Each year, hundreds of thousands of babies are born to drug-addicted mothers. Some of
these babies are born addicted to drugs, and a great many of them will suffer child abuse or
neglect. Barbara Harris, the founder of a North Carolinabased charity called Project
Prevention, has a market-based solution: offer drug-addicted women $300 cash if they will
undergo sterilization or long-term birth control. More than three thousand women have
taken her up on the offer since she launched the program in 1997.
1??Critics call the project morally reprehensible, a bribe for sterilization. They argue that
offering drug addicts a financial inducement to give up their reproductive capacity amounts to
coercion, especially since the program targets vulnerable women in poor neighborhoods.
Rather than help the recipients overcome their addiction, critics complain, the money
subsidizes it. As one promotional flyer for the program states, Dont Let a Pregnancy Ruin
Your Drug Habit.
2??Harris concedes that, more often than not, her clients use the cash to buy more drugs.
But she believes this is a small price to pay to prevent children from being born with drug
addictions. Some of the women who accept the cash for sterilization have been pregnant a
dozen times or more; many already have multiple children in foster care. What makes a
womans right to procreate more important than the right of a child to have a normal life?
Harris asks. She speaks from experience. She and her husband adopted four children who
were born to a crack-addicted woman in Los Angeles. Ill do anything I have to do to prevent
babies from suffering. I dont believe that anybody has the right to force their addiction on
another human being.
3??In 2010, Harris took her incentive scheme to Britain, where the idea of cash for
sterilization met strong opposition in the pressan article in the Telegraph called it a creepy
proposaland from the British Medical Association. Undaunted, Harris has expanded to
Kenya, where she pays HIV-positive women $40 to be fitted with intrauterine devices, a form
of long-term contraception. In Kenya and South Africa, where Harris plans to go next, health
officials and human rights proponents have voiced outrage and opposition.
4??From the standpoint of market reasoning, its not clear why the program should provoke
outrage. Though some critics say it reminds them of Nazi eugenics, the cash-for-sterilization
program is a voluntary arrangement between private parties. The state is not involved, and
no one is sterilized against her will. Some argue that drug addicts, desperate for money, are
not capable of making a truly voluntary choice when offered easy cash. But if their judgment
is that severely impaired, Harris replies, how can they possibly be expected to make sensible
decisions about bearing and raising children?
5??Viewed as a market transaction, the deal produces gains for both parties and increases
social utility. The addict gets $300 in exchange for giving up her ability to have children. For
their $300, Harris and her organization receive the assurance that the addict will not produce
any more drug-addicted babies in the future. According to standard market logic, the
exchange is economically efficient. It allocates the goodin this case, control over the
addicts reproductive capacityto the person (Harris) who is willing to pay the most for it and
who is therefore presumed to value it most highly.
22
So why all the fuss? For two reasons, which together shed light on the moral limits of
marketing reasoning. Some criticize the cash-for-sterilization deal as coercive; others call it
bribery. These are actually different objections. Each points to a different reason to resist the
reach of markets into places where they dont belong.
The coercion objection worries that when a drug-addicted woman agrees to be sterilized
for money, she is not acting freely. Although no one is holding a gun to her head, the financial
inducement may be too tempting to resist. Given her addiction and, in most cases, her
poverty, her choice to be sterilized for $300 may not really be free. She may be coerced, in
effect, by the necessity of her situation. Of course, people disagree about what inducements,
under what circumstances, amount to coercion. So in order to assess the moral status of any
market transaction, we have to ask a prior question: Under what conditions do market
relations reflect freedom of choice, and under what conditions do they exert a kind of
coercion?
The bribery objection is different. It is not about the conditions under which a deal is made
but about the nature of the good being bought and sold. Consider a standard case of bribery.
If an unscrupulous character bribes a judge or government official to gain an illicit benefit or a
favor, the nefarious transaction may be entirely
voluntary. Neither party may be coerced, and both may gain. What makes the bribe
objectionable is not that its coercive but that its corrupt. The corruption consists in buying
and selling something (a favorable verdict, say, or political influence) that should not be up for
sale.
We often associate corruption with illicit payoffs to public officials. But as we saw in
chapter 1??, corruption also has a broader meaning: we corrupt a good, an activity, or a
social practice whenever we treat it according to a lower norm than is appropriate to it. So, to
take an extreme example, having babies in order to sell them for profit is a corruption of
parenthood, because it treats children as things to be used rather than beings to be loved.
Political corruption can be seen in the same light: when a judge accepts a bribe to render a
corrupt verdict, he acts as if his judicial authority were an instrument of personal gain rather
than a public trust. He degrades and demeans his office by treating it according to a lower
norm than is appropriate to it.
This broader notion of corruption lies behind the charge that the cash-for-sterilization
scheme is a form of bribery. Those who call it bribery are suggesting that, whether or not the
deal is coercive, it is corrupt. And the reason it is corrupt is that both partiesthe buyer
(Harris) and the seller (the addict)value the good being sold (the childbearing capacity of
the seller) in the wrong way. Harris treats drug-addicted and HIV-positive women as damaged
baby-making machines that can be switched off for a fee. Those who accept her offer
acquiesce in this degrading view of themselves. This is the moral force of the bribery charge.
Like corrupt judges and public officials, those who get sterilized for money sell something that
should not be up for sale. They treat their reproductive capacity as a tool for
monetary gain rather than a gift or trust to be exercised according to norms of
responsibility and care.
It might be argued, in reply, that the analogy is flawed. A judge who accepts a bribe in
exchange for a corrupt verdict sells something that isnt his to sell; the verdict is not his
property. But a woman who agrees to be sterilized for pay sells something that belongs to
hernamely, her reproductive capacity. Money aside, the woman does no wrong if she
chooses to be sterilized (or not to have children); but the judge does wrong to render an
unjust verdict even in the absence of a bribe. If a woman has a right to give up her
23
childbearing capacity for reasons of her own, some would argue, she must also have the right
to do so for a price.
If we accept this argument, then the cash-for-sterilization deal is not bribery after all. So in
order to determine whether a womans reproductive capacity should be subject to a market
transaction, we have to ask what kind of good it is: Should we regard our bodies as
possessions that we own and can use and dispose of as we please, or do some uses of our
bodies amount to self-degradation? This is a large and controversial question that also arises
in debates about prostitution, surrogate motherhood, and the buying and selling of eggs and
sperm. Before we can decide whether market relations are appropriate to such domains, we
have to figure out what norms should govern our sexual and procreative lives.
THE ECONOMIC APPROACH TO LIFE
Most economists prefer not to deal with moral questions, at least not in their role as
economists. They say their job is to explain peoples
behavior, not judge it. Telling us what norms should govern this or that activity or how we
should value this or that good is not, they insist, what they do. The price system allocates
goods according to peoples preferences; it doesnt assess those preferences as worthy or
admirable or appropriate to the circumstance. But despite their protestations, economists
increasingly find themselves entangled in moral questions.
This is happening for two reasons: one reflects a change in the world, the other a change in
the way economists understand their subject.
In recent decades, markets and market-oriented thinking have reached into spheres of life
traditionally governed by nonmarket norms. More and more, we are putting a price on
noneconomic goods. Harriss $300 offer is an instance of this trend.
At the same time, economists have been recasting their discipline, making it more abstract
and more ambitious. In the past, economists dealt with avowedly economic topicsinflation
and unemployment, savings and investment, interest rates and foreign trade. They explained
how countries become wealthy and how the price system aligns supply and demand for pork
belly futures and other market goods.
Recently, however, many economists have set themselves a more ambitious project. What
economics offers, they argue, is not merely a set of insights about the production and
consumption of material goods but also a science of human behavior. At the heart of this
science is a simple but sweeping idea: In all domains of life, human behavior can be explained
by assuming that people decide what to do by weighing the costs and benefits of the options
before them, and choosing the one they believe will give them the greatest welfare, or utility.
If this idea is right, then everything has its price. The price may be explicit, as with cars and
toasters and pork bellies. Or it may be implicit, as with sex, marriage, children, education,
criminal activity, racial discrimination, political participation, environmental protection, even
human life. Whether or not were aware of it, the law of supply and demand governs the
provision of all these things.
The most influential statement of this view is offered by Gary Becker, an economist at the
University of Chicago, in The Economic Approach to Human Behavior (1976). He rejects the
old-fashioned notion that economics is the study of the allocation of material goods. The
persistence of the traditional view is due, he speculates, to a reluctance to submit certain
kinds of human behavior to the frigid calculus of economics. Becker seeks to wean us from
that reluctance.
6??According to Becker, people act to maximize their welfare, whatever activity theyre
24
engaged in. This assumption, used relentlessly and unflinchingly, form[s] the heart of the
economic approach to human behavior. The economic approach applies regardless of what
goods are at stake. It explains life-and-death decisions and the choice of a brand of coffee.
It applies to choosing a mate and buying a can of paint. Becker continues: I have come to the
position that the economic approach is a comprehensive one that is applicable to all human
behavior, be it behavior involving money prices or imputed shadow prices, repeated or
infrequent decisions, large or minor decisions, emotional or mechanical ends, rich or poor
persons, men or women, adults or children, brilliant or stupid persons, patients or therapists,
businessmen or politicians, teachers or students.
7??Becker does not claim that patients and therapists, businessmen and politicians,
teachers and students actually understand their
decisions as governed by economic imperatives. But thats only because were often blind
to the wellsprings of our actions. The economic approach does not assume that people are
necessarily conscious of their efforts to maximize or can verbalize or otherwise describe in an
informative way the reasons for their behavior. However, those with a keen eye for the price
signals implicit in every human situation can see that all our behavior, however remote from
material concerns, can be explained and predicted as a rational calculus of costs and benefits.
8??Becker illustrates his claim with an economic analysis of marriage and divorce:
According to the economic approach, a person decides to marry when the utility expected from marriage exceeds that
expected from remaining single or from additional search for a more suitable mate. Similarly, a married person terminates
his (or her) marriage when the utility anticipated from becoming single or marrying someone else exceeds the loss in utility
from separation, including losses due to physical separation from ones children, division of joint assets, legal fees, and so
forth. Since many persons are looking for mates, a market in marriages can be said to exist.
9??
Some think this calculating view takes the romance out of marriage. They argue that love,
obligation, and commitment are ideals that cant be reduced to monetary terms. They insist
that a good marriage is priceless, something money cant buy.
To Becker, this is a piece of sentimentality that obstructs clear thinking. With an ingenuity
worthy of admiration if put to better use, he writes, those who resist the economic approach
explain human behavior as the messy, unpredictable result of ignorance and
irrationality, values and their frequent unexplained shifts, custom and tradition, the
compliance somehow induced by social norms. Becker has little patience for this messiness.
A single-minded focus on income and price effects, he believes, offers social science a sturdier
foundation.
10??Can all human action be understood in the image of a market? Economists, political
scientists, legal scholars, and others continue to debate this question. But what is striking is
how potent this image has becomenot only in academia but also in everyday life. To a
remarkable degree, the last few decades have witnessed the remaking of social relations in
the image of market relations. One measure of this transformation is the growing use of
monetary incentives to solve social problems.
PAYING KIDS FOR GOOD GRADES
Paying people to be sterilized is one brazen example. Here is another: school districts across
the United States now try to improve academic performance by paying children for getting
good grades or high scores on standardized tests. The idea that cash incentives can cure what
ails our schools looms large in the movement for educational reform.
25
I attended a very good but excessively competitive public high school in Pacific Palisades,
California. I occasionally heard of kids being paid by their parents for every A on their report
card. Most of us considered this slightly scandalous. But it never occurred to anyone that the
school itself might pay for good grades. I do remember that the Los Angeles Dodgers had a
promotion in those years that gave free tickets to high school students who made the honor
roll.
We certainly had no objections to this scheme, and my friends and I attended quite a few
games. But no one thought of it as an incentive; it was more of a boondoggle.
Things are different now. More and more, financial incentives are seen as a key to
educational improvement, especially for students in poorly performing urban schools.
A recent Time magazine cover put the question bluntly: Should Schools Bribe Kids?
11?? Some say it all depends on whether the bribes work.
Roland Fryer, Jr., an economics professor at Harvard, is trying to find out. Fryer, an African
American who grew up in tough neighborhoods in Florida and Texas, believes that cash
incentives may help motivate kids in inner-city schools. Backed by foundation funding, he has
tested his idea in several of the largest school districts in the United States. Beginning in 2007,
his project paid out $6.3 million to students in 261 urban schools with predominantly African
American and Hispanic populations from low-income families. Different incentive schemes
were used in each city.
12??
26
In New York City, participating schools paid fourth graders $25 to score well on standardized tests. Seventh graders
27
could earn $50 per test. The average seventh grader made a total of $231.55.13??In Washington D.C., schools paid
28
middle school students cash rewards for attendance, good behavior, and turning in their homework. Conscientious
kids could make up to $100 every two weeks. The average student collected about $40 in the biweekly payoff and a
29
total of $532.85 for the school year.14??In Chicago, they offered ninth graders cash for getting good grades in their
30
courses: $50 for an A, $35 for a B, and $20 for a C. The top student made a handsome haul of $1,875 for the school
31
year.15??In Dallas, they pay second graders $2 for each book they read. To collect the cash, students have to take a
computerized quiz to prove theyve read the book.16??
The cash payments yielded mixed results. In New York City, paying kids for good test scores
did nothing to improve their academic performance. The cash for good grades in Chicago led
to better attendance but no improvement on standardized tests. In Washington, the
payments helped some students (Hispanics, boys, and students with behavior problems)
achieve higher reading scores. The cash worked best with the Dallas second graders; the kids
who got paid $2 per book wound up with higher reading comprehension scores at the end of
the year.
17??Fryers project is one of many recent attempts to pay kids to do better in school.
Another such program offers cash for good scores on Advanced Placement exams. AP courses
expose high school students to challenging college-level material in math, history, science,
English, and other subjects. In 1996, Texas launched the Advanced Placement Incentive
Program, which pays students from $100 to $500 (depending on the school) for earning a
passing grade (a score of 3 or higher) on AP exams. Their teachers are also rewarded, with
$100 to $500 for each student who passes the exam, plus additional salary bonuses. The
incentive program, which now operates in sixty Texas high schools, seeks to improve the
college readiness of minority and low-income students. A dozen states now offer financial
incentives to students and teachers for success on AP tests.
18??Some incentive programs target teachers rather than students. Although teachers
unions have been wary of pay-for-performance
proposals, the idea of paying teachers for the academic achievement of their students is
popular among voters, politicians, and some educational reformers. Since 2005, school
districts in Denver; New York City; Washington, D.C.; Guilford County, North Carolina; and
Houston have implemented cash incentive schemes for teachers. In 2006, Congress
established the Teacher Incentive Fund to provide pay-for-performance grants for teachers in
low-achieving schools. The Obama administration increased funding for the program.
Recently, a privately funded incentive project in Nashville offered middle school math
teachers cash bonuses of up to $15,000 for improving the test scores of their students.
19??The bonuses in Nashville, sizable though they were, had virtually no impact on students
math performance. But the Advanced Placement incentive programs in Texas and elsewhere
have had a positive effect. More students, including students from low-income and minority
backgrounds, have been encouraged to take AP courses. And many are passing the
standardized exams that qualify them for college credit. This is very good news. But it does
not bear out the standard economic view about financial incentives: the more you pay, the
harder students will work, and the better the outcome. The story is more complicated.
The AP incentive programs that have succeeded offer more than cash to students and
teachers; they transform the culture of schools and the attitudes of students toward
academic achievement. Such programs provide special training for teachers, laboratory
equipment, and organized tutoring sessions after school and on Saturdays. One tough urban
school in Worcester, Massachusetts, made AP classes available to all students, rather than to
a preselected elite, and recruited students with posters featuring rap stars, making it cool for
boys with low-slung jeans who idolize rappers like Lil
Wayne to take the hardest classes. The $100 incentive for passing the AP test at the end of
the year was a motivator, it seems, more for its expressive effect than for the money itself.
Theres something cool about the money, one successful student told The New York Times.
Its a great extra. The twice-weekly after-school tutoring sessions and eighteen hours of
Saturday classes provided by the program also helped.
32
20??When an economist looked closely at the Advanced Placement incentive program in
low-income Texas schools, he found something interesting: the program succeeded in
boosting academic achievement but not in a way that the standard price effect would
predict (the more you pay, the better the grades). Although some schools paid $100 for a
passing grade on the AP test, and others paid as much as $500, the results were no better in
schools that offered the higher amounts. Students and teachers were not simply behaving
like revenue maximizers, wrote C. Kirabo Jackson, the author of the study.
21??So what was going on? The money had an expressive effectmaking academic
achievement cool. Thats why the amount was not decisive. Although only AP courses in
English, math, and science qualified for the cash incentives at most schools, the program also
led to higher enrollment in other AP courses, such as history and social studies. The Advanced
Placement incentive programs have succeeded not by bribing students to achieve but by
changing attitudes toward achievement and the culture of schools.
22??HEALTH BRIBES
Health care is another area where cash incentives are in vogue. Increasingly, doctors,
insurance companies, and employers are paying
people to be healthyto take their medications, to quit smoking, to lose weight. You might
think that avoiding disease or life-threatening ailments would be motivation enough. But,
surprisingly, thats often not the case. One-third to one-half of patients fail to take their
medications as prescribed. When their conditions worsen, the overall result is billions of
dollars a year in additional health costs. So doctors and insurers are offering cash incentives
to motivate patients to take their meds.
23??In Philadelphia, patients prescribed warfarin, an antiblood clot medication, can win cash
rewards ranging from $10 to $100 for taking the drug. (A computerized pillbox records
whether they take the drug and tells them whether they won that day.) Participants in the
incentive scheme make an average of $90 a month for adhering to their prescriptions. In
Britain, some patients with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia are paid 15 (about $22) to
show up for their monthly injection of antipsychotic drugs. Teenage girls are offered 45
(about $68) in shopping vouchers to receive vaccinations that protect against a sexually
transmitted virus that can cause cervical cancer.
24??Smoking imposes big costs on companies that provide health insurance to their workers.
So in 2009, General Electric began paying some of its employees to quit smoking$750 if
they could quit for as long as a year. The results were so promising that GE has extended the
offer to all its U.S. employees. The Safeway grocery store chain offers lower health-insurance
premiums to workers who dont smoke and who keep their weight, blood pressure, and
cholesterol under control. A growing number of companies use some combination of carrots
and sticks to motivate employees to improve their health. Eighty percent of big U.S.
companies now offer financial incentives for those who participate in wellness programs. And
almost half
penalize workers for unhealthy habits, typically by charging them more for health
insurance.
25??Weight loss is the most alluring if intractable target of cash incentive experiments. The
NBC reality show The Biggest Loser dramatizes the current craze of paying people to slim
down. It offers $250,000 to the contestant who achieves the biggest proportional weight loss
during the season.
26??Doctors, researchers, and employers have tried offering more modest incentives. In one
33
U.S. study, a reward of a few hundred dollars motivated obese participants to shed about
fourteen pounds in four months. (Unfortunately, the weight losses proved temporary.) In
Britain, where the National Health Service spends 5 percent of its budget treating obesityrelated
diseases, the NHS tried paying overweight people up to 425 (about $612) to lose
weight and keep it off for two years. The scheme is called Pounds for Pounds.
27??Two questions can be asked about paying people for healthy behavior: Does it work?
and, Is it objectionable?
From an economic point of view, the case for paying people for good health is a simple
matter of costs and benefits. The only real question is whether incentive schemes work. If
money motivates people to take their meds, quit smoking, or join a gym, thus reducing the
need for expensive care later, why object?
And yet many do object. The use of cash incentives to promote healthy behavior generates
fierce moral controversy. One objection is about fairness, the other about bribery. The
fairness objection is voiced, in different ways, on both sides of the political spectrum. Some
conservatives argue that overweight people should slim down on their own; paying them to
do so (especially with taxpayer funds) unfairly rewards slothful behavior. These critics see
cash incentives as a reward for indulgence rather than a form of treatment. Underlying
this objection is the idea that we can all control our own weight, so its unfair to pay
those who have failed to do so on their ownespecially if the payments come, as they
sometimes do in Britain, from the National Health Service. Paying someone to ditch bad
habits is the ultimate in nanny state mentality, absolving them of any responsibility for their
health.
28??Some liberals voice the opposite worry: that financial rewards for good health (and
penalties for bad health) can unfairly disadvantage people for medical conditions beyond
their control. Allowing companies or health insurers to discriminate between the healthy and
the unhealthy in setting insurance premiums is unfair to those who, through no fault of their
own, are less healthy and so at greater risk. It is one thing to give everyone a discount for
joining a gym, but something else to set insurance rates based on health outcomes that many
people cant control.
29??The bribery objection is more elusive. The press commonly calls health incentives
bribes. But are they? In the cash for sterilization scheme, the bribery is clear. Women are paid
to relinquish their reproductive capacity not for their own good but for the sake of an
external endpreventing more drug-addicted babies. They are being paid to act, in many
cases at least, against their interest.
But the same cant be said of cash incentives to help people stop smoking or lose weight.
Whatever external ends may be served (such as reducing health costs for companies or a
national health service), the money encourages behavior that promotes the health of the
recipient. So how is it a bribe?
30?? Or, to ask a slightly different question, why does the charge of bribery seem to fit, even
though healthy behavior is in the interest of the person being bribed?
It fits, I think, because we suspect that the monetary motive
crowds out other, better motives. Heres how: Good health is not only about achieving the
right cholesterol level and body mass index. It is also about developing the right attitude to
our physical well-being and treating our bodies with care and respect. Paying people to take
their meds does little to develop such attitudes and may even undermine them.
This is because bribes are manipulative. They bypass persuasion and substitute an external
reason for an intrinsic one. You dont care enough about your own well-being to quit
smoking or lose weight? Then do it because Ill pay you $750.
34
Health bribes trick us into doing something we should be doing anyhow. They induce us to
do the right thing for the wrong reason. Sometimes, it helps to be tricked. It isnt easy to quit
smoking or lose weight on our own. But eventually, we should rise above manipulation.
Otherwise, the bribe may become habit forming.
If health bribes work, worries about corrupting good attitudes toward health may seem
hopelessly high-minded. If cash can cure us of obesity, why cavil about manipulation? One
answer is that a proper concern for our physical well-being is a part of self-respect. Another
answer is more practical: absent the attitudes that sustain good health, the pounds may
return when the incentives end.
This seems to have happened in the paid weight-loss schemes that have been studied so
far. Cash to quit smoking has shown a glimmer of hope. But even the most encouraging study
found that more than 90 percent of smokers who were paid for kicking the habit were back to
smoking six months after the incentives ended. In general, cash incentives seem to work
better at getting people to show up for a specific eventa doctors appointment or an
injectionthan at changing long-term habits and behaviors.
31??Paying people to be healthy can backfire, by failing to cultivate the values that sustain
good health. If this is true, the economists question (Do cash incentives work?) and the
moralists question (Are they objectionable?) are more closely connected than first appears.
Whether an incentive works depends on the goal. And the goal, properly conceived, may
include values and attitudes that cash incentives undermine.
PERVERSE INCENTIVES
A friend of mine used to pay his young children $1 each time they wrote a thank-you note. (I
could usually tell by reading the notes that they were written under duress.) This policy may
or may not work in the long run. It might turn out that, by writing enough thank-you notes,
the children will eventually learn the real point of them and continue to express gratitude for
gifts, even when they are no longer paid to do so. Its also possible that they will absorb the
wrong lesson, and regard thank-you notes as piecework, a burden to be performed for pay. In
this case, the habit wont take, and they will stop writing such notes once they are no longer
paid. Worse, the bribes may corrupt their moral education and make it harder for them to
learn the virtue of gratitude. Even if it increases production in the short run, the bribe for
thank-you notes will have failed, by inculcating the wrong way of valuing the good in
question.
A similar question arises in the case of cash for good grades: Why not pay a child for getting
good grades or for reading a book? The goal is to motivate the child to study or to read. The
payment is an incentive to promote that end. Economics teaches that people respond to
incentives. And while some children may be motivated to
read books for the love of learning, others may not. So why not use money as a further
incentive?
It may turn outas economic reasoning suggeststhat two incentives work better than
one. But it could also turn out that the monetary incentive undermines the intrinsic one,
leading to less reading rather than more. Or to more reading in the short run but for the
wrong reason.
In this scenario, the market is an instrument, but not an innocent one. What begins as a
market mechanism becomes a market norm. The obvious worry is that the payment may
habituate children to think of reading books as a way of making money, and so erode, or
crowd out, or corrupt the love of reading for its own sake.
35
The use of cash incentives to get people to lose weight or read books or be sterilized
reflects the logic of the economic approach to life, but also extends it. When Gary Becker
wrote, in the mid-1970s, that everything we do can be explained by assuming that we
calculate costs and benefits, he referred to shadow pricesthe imaginary prices said to be
implicit in the alternatives we face and the choices we make. So, for example, when a person
decides to stay married rather than get a divorce, no prices are posted; rather, the person
considers the implicit price of a breakupthe financial price and the emotional priceand
decides the benefits arent worth it.
But the incentive schemes that abound today go further. By putting an actual, explicit price
on activities far removed from material pursuits, they take Beckers shadow prices out of the
shadows and make them real. They enact his suggestion that all human relations are,
ultimately, market relations.
Becker himself made a striking proposal along these lines, a market solution to the
contentious debate over immigration policy: the United States should scrap its complex
system of quotas, point systems,
family preferences, and queues and simply sell the right to immigrate. Given the demand,
Becker suggests setting the price of admission at $50,000, or perhaps higher.
32??Immigrants willing to pay a large entrance fee, Becker reasons, would automatically
have desirable characteristics. They would likely be young, skilled, ambitious, hardworking,
and unlikely to make use of welfare or unemployment benefits. When Becker first proposed
selling the right to immigrate in 1987, many considered the notion far-fetched. But to those
steeped in economic thinking, it was a sensible, even obvious way of bringing market
reasoning to bear on an otherwise thorny question: How should we decide which immigrants
to admit?
Julian L. Simon, another economist, proposed a similar plan at about the same time. He
suggested setting a yearly quota of immigrants to be admitted, and auctioning admission to
the highest bidders until the quota was filled. Selling the right to immigrate is fair, Simon
argued, because it discriminates according to the standard of a market-oriented society:
ability and willingness to pay. To address the objection that his plan would allow only the
wealthy to enter, Simon suggested allowing the winning bidders to borrow some of their
entry fee from the government and pay it back later with their income tax. If they were
unable to repay, he observed, they could always be deported.
33??The idea of selling the right to immigrate was offensive to some. But in an age of rising
market faith, the gist of the Becker-Simon proposal soon found its way into law. In 1990,
Congress provided that foreigners who invested $500,000 in the United States could
immigrate, with their families, for two years, after which they could receive a permanent
green card if the investment created at least ten jobs. The cash-for-green-card plan was the
ultimate queue-jumping
scheme, a fast track to citizenship. In 2011, two senators proposed a bill offering a similar
cash incentive to boost the high-end housing market, which was still weak in the aftermath of
the financial crisis. Any foreigner who bought a $500,000 house would receive a visa allowing
the buyer, spouse, and minor children to live in the United States as long as they owned the
property. A headline in The Wall Street Journal summed up the deal: BUY HOUSE, GET A VISA.
34??Becker even proposed charging admission to refugees fleeing persecution. The free
market, he claimed, would make it easy to decide which refugees to acceptthose
sufficiently motivated to pay the price: For obvious reasons, political refugees and those
persecuted in their own countries would be willing to pay a sizeable fee to gain admission to a
36
free nation. So a fee system would automatically avoid time-consuming hearings about
whether they are really in physical danger if they were forced to return home.
35??Asking a refugee fleeing persecution to hand over $50,000 may strike you as callous, yet
another instance of the economists failure to distinguish between the willingness and the
ability to pay. So consider another market proposal to solve the refugee problem, one that
doesnt make the refugees pay out of pocket. Peter Schuck, a law professor, proposed the
following:
Let an international body assign each country a yearly refugee quota, based on national
wealth. Then let nations buy and sell these obligations among themselves. So, for example, if
Japan is allocated twenty thousand refugees per year but doesnt want to take them, it could
pay Russia, or Uganda, to take them in. According to standard market logic, everyone
benefits. Russia or Uganda gains a new source of national income, Japan meets its refugee
obligations by outsourcing them, and more refugees are rescued than would otherwise find
asylum.
36??There is something distasteful about a market in refugees, even if it leads to more
refugees finding asylum. But what exactly is objectionable about it? It has something to do
with the fact that a market in refugees changes our view of who refugees are and how they
should be treated. It encourages the participantsthe buyers, the sellers, and also those
whose asylum is being haggled overto think of refugees as burdens to be unloaded or as
revenue sources, rather than as human beings in peril.
One might acknowledge the degrading effect of a market in refugees and still conclude that
the scheme does more good than harm. But what the example illustrates is that markets are
not mere mechanisms. They embody certain norms. They presupposeand promote
certain ways of valuing the goods being exchanged.
Economists often assume that markets do not touch or taint the goods they regulate. But
this is untrue. Markets leave their mark on social norms. Often, market incentives erode or
crowd out nonmarket incentives.
A study of some child-care centers in Israel shows how this can happen. The centers faced a
familiar problem: parents sometimes came late to pick up their children. A teacher had to
stay with the children until the tardy parents arrived. To solve this problem, the centers
imposed a fine for late pickups. What do you suppose happened? Late pickups actually
increased.
37??Now if you assume that people respond to incentives, this is a puzzling result. You would
expect the fine to reduce, not increase, the incidence of late pickups. So what happened?
Introducing the monetary payment changed the norms. Before, parents who came late felt
guilty; they were imposing an inconvenience on the teachers. Now parents considered a late
pickup as a service for which they
were willing to pay. They treated the fine as if it were a fee. Rather than imposing on the
teacher, they were simply paying him or her to work longer.
FINES VERSUS FEES
What is the difference between a fine and a fee? Its worth pondering the distinction. Fines
register moral disapproval, whereas fees are simply prices that imply no moral judgment.
When we impose a fine for littering, were saying that littering is wrong. Tossing a beer can
into the Grand Canyon not only imposes cleanup costs. It reflects a bad attitude that we as a
society want to discourage. Suppose the fine is $100, and a wealthy hiker decides its worth
the convenience of not having to carry his empties out of the park. He treats the fine as a fee
37
and tosses his beer cans into the Grand Canyon. Even though he pays up, we consider that
hes done something wrong. By treating the Grand Canyon as an expensive Dumpster, he has
failed to appreciate it in an appropriate way.
Or consider parking spaces reserved for use by the physically disabled. Suppose a busy
able-bodied contractor wants to park near his building site. For the convenience of parking his
car in a place reserved for the disabled, he is willing to pay the rather large fine; he considers
it a cost of doing business. Although he pays the fine, dont we consider that hes doing
something wrong? He treats the fine as if it were simply an expensive parking lot fee. But this
misses its moral significance. In treating the fine as a fee, he fails to respect the needs of the
physically disabled and the desire of the community to accommodate them by setting aside
certain parking spaces.
The $217,000 Speeding Ticket
When people treat fines as fees, they flout the norms that fines express. Often, society strikes
back. Some affluent drivers consider speeding tickets the price they pay for driving as fast as
they please. In Finland, the law leans hard against that way of thinking (and driving) by basing
fines on the income of the offender. In 2003, Jussi Salonoja, the twenty-seven-year-old heir to
a sausage business, was fined 170,000 (about $217,000 at the time) for driving 80 kilometers
per hour (50 mph) in a 40 km/h (25 mph) zone. Salonoja, one of the richest men in Finland,
had an income of 7 million per year. The previous record for the most expensive speeding
ticket was held by Anssi Vanjoki, an executive of Nokia, the mobile phone company. In 2002,
he was fined 116,000 for speeding through Helsinki on his Harley-Davidson. A judge reduced
the fine when Vanjoki showed that his income had dropped, due to a downturn in Nokias
profits.
38??What makes the Finnish speeding tickets fines rather than fees is not only the fact that
they vary with income. Its the moral opprobrium that lies behind themthe judgment that
violating the speed limit is wrong. Progressive income taxes also vary with income, and yet
they are not fines; their purpose is to raise revenue, not to penalize income-producing
activity. Finlands $217,000 speeding ticket shows that society not only wants to cover the
costs of risky behavior; it also wants the punishment to fit the crimeand the bank balance
of the perpetrator.
Notwithstanding the cavalier attitude of some fast-driving rich folk toward speed limits, the
distinction between a fine and a fee is not easily effaced. In most places, being pulled over
and issued a speeding ticket still carries a stigma. No one thinks the officer is simply collecting
a toll, or presenting the offender with a bill for the
convenience of a faster commute. I recently ran across a bizarre proposal that makes this
clear, by showing what a speeding fee rather than fine would actually look like.
In 2010, Eugene Gino DiSimone, an independent candidate for governor of Nevada,
proposed an unusual way to raise money for the state budget: allow people to pay $25 per
day to exceed the posted speed limit and drive ninety miles per hour on designated roads in
Nevada. If you wanted the option of speeding from time to time, you would buy a
transponder and dial into your account by cell phone whenever you needed to get
somewhere fast. The $25 would be charged to your credit card, and you would be free to
speed for the next twenty-four hours without being pulled over. If an officer with a radar gun
detected you barreling down the highway, the transponder would signal that you were a
paying customer, and no ticket would be issued. DiSimone estimated that his proposal would
raise at least $1.3 billion a year for the state, without raising taxes. Despite the tempting
38
windfall to the state budget, the Nevada Highway Patrol said the plan would imperil public
safety, and the candidate went down to defeat.
39??Subway Cheats and Video Rentals
In practice, the distinction between a fine and a fee can be unstable, even contestable.
Consider this: If you ride the Paris Mtro without paying the $2 fare, you can be fined up to
$60. The fine is a penalty for cheating the system by evading the fare. Recently, however, a
group of habitual fare dodgers came up with a clever way of converting the fine into a fee,
and a modest one at that. They formed an insurance fund that will pay their fine if they get
caught. Each member pays in about $8.50 a month to the fund (called a mutuelle des
fraudeurs), far less than the $74 it costs to buy a legitimate monthly pass.
The members of the mutuelle movement say they are motivated not by money but by an
ideological commitment to free public transportation. Its a way to resist together, a leader
of the group told the Los Angeles Times. There are things in France which are supposed to
be freeschools, health. So why not transportation? Although the fraudeurs are unlikely to
prevail, their novel scheme converts a penalty for cheating into a monthly insurance
premium, a price they are willing to pay to resist the system.
40??To decide whether a fine or a fee is appropriate, we have to figure out the purpose of
the social institution in question and the norms that should govern it. The answer will vary
depending on whether were talking about showing up late at the day-care center, jumping
the turnstile in the Paris subway, or  returning an overdue DVD to the local video store.
In the early days of video stores, they treated late fees as fines. If I returned a video late,
the person behind the counter had a certain attitude. It was as if Id done something morally
wrong, keeping the movie an extra three days. I thought this attitude was misplaced.
A commercial video store is not a public library, after all. Libraries impose fines for overdue
books, not fees. Thats because their purpose is to organize the free sharing of books within a
community. So its right that I feel guilty when I slink back with an overdue library book.
But a video store is a business. Its purpose is to make money by renting videos. So if I keep
the movie longer and pay for the extra days, I should be regarded as a better customer, not a
worse one. Or so I thought. Gradually, this norm has shifted. Video stores now seem to treat
overdue charges as fees rather than fines.
Chinas One-Child Policy
Often, the moral stakes are higher. Consider this controversy over the sometimes blurry line
between a fine and a fee: in China, the fine for violating the governments one-child policy is
increasingly regarded by the affluent as a price for an extra child. The policy, put in place
more than three de cades ago to reduce Chinas population growth, limits most couples in
urban areas to one child. (Rural families are allowed a second child if the first one is a girl.)
The fine varies from region to region but reaches 200,000 yuan (about $31,000) in major
citiesa staggering figure for the average worker but easily affordable for wealthy
entrepreneurs, sports stars, and celebrities. One account from a Chinese news agency tells of
a pregnant woman and her husband in Guangzhou who strutted in to their local birth
control office, threw the money on the desk, and said, Here is 200,000 yuan. We need to
take care of our future baby. Please do not come to disturb us.
41??Family-planning officials have sought to reassert the punitive aspect of the sanction by
increasing fines for affluent offenders, denouncing celebrities who violate the policy and
39
banning them from appearing on television, and preventing business executives with extra
kids from receiving government contracts. The fine is a piece of cake for the rich, explained
Zhai Zhenwu, a professor of sociology at Renmin University. The government had to hit them
harder where it really hurt, at their fame, reputation, and standing in society.
42??The authorities regard the fine as a penalty and want to preserve the stigma associated
with it. They dont want it to devolve into a fee. This is not mainly because theyre worried
about affluent parents having too many children; the number of wealthy offenders is
relatively small. Whats at stake is the norm underlying the policy. If the fine were merely a
fee, the state would find itself in the awkward business of selling the right to have extra
children to those able and willing to pay for it.
Tradable Procreation Permits
Oddly enough, some Western economists have called for a market-based approach to
population control strikingly similar to the fee-based system the Chinese officials are trying to
avoid. These economists have urged countries that need to limit their population to issue
tradable procreation permits. In 1964, the economist Kenneth Boulding proposed a system of
marketable procreation licenses as a way of dealing with overpopulation. Each woman would
be issued a certificate (or two, depending on the policy) entitling her to have a child. She
would be free to use the certificate or sell it at the going rate. Boulding imagined a market in
which people eager to have children would purchase certificates from (as he indelicately put
it) the poor, the nuns, the maiden aunts, and so on.
43??The plan would be less coercive than a system of fixed quotas, as in a one-child policy. It
would also be economically more efficient, since it would get the goods (in this case, children)
to the consumers most willing to pay for them. Recently, two Belgian economists revived
Bouldings proposal. They pointed out that, since the rich would likely buy procreation
licenses from the poor, the scheme would have the further advantage of reducing inequality
by giving the poor a new source of income.
44??Some people oppose all restrictions on procreation, while others believe that
reproductive rights can legitimately be restricted to avoid overpopulation. Set aside for the
moment that disagreement of
principle and imagine a society that was determined to implement mandatory population
control. Which policy would you find less objectionable: a fixed quota system that limits each
couple to one child and fines those who exceed the limit, or a market-based system that
issues each couple a tradable procreation voucher entitling the bearer to have one child?
From the standpoint of economic reasoning, the second policy is clearly preferable. The
freedom to choose whether to use the voucher or sell it makes some people better off and no
one worse off. Those who buy or sell vouchers gain (by making mutually advantageous
trades) and those who dont enter the market are no worse off than they would be under the
fixed quota system; they can still have one child.
And yet there is something troubling about a system in which people buy and sell the right
to have kids. Part of whats troubling is the unfairness of such a system under conditions of
inequality. We hesitate to make children a luxury good, affordable by the rich but not the
poor. If having children is a central aspect of human flourishing, then its unfair to condition
access to this good on the ability to pay.
Beyond the fairness objection is the question of bribery. At the heart of the market
transaction is a morally disquieting activity: parents who want an extra child must induce or
40
entice other prospective parents to sell off their right to have a child. Morally, its not much
different from buying a couples only child after it has been born.
Economists might argue that a market in children, or in the right to have them, has the
virtue of efficiency: it allocates kids to those who value them most highly, as measured by the
ability to pay. But trafficking in the right to procreate promotes a mercenary attitude toward
children that corrupts parenthood. Central to the norm of
parental love is the idea that ones children are inalienable; it is unthinkable to put them up
for sale. So to buy a child, or the right to have one, from another prospective parent is to cast
a shadow over parenthood as such. Wouldnt the experience of loving your children be
tainted if you acquired some of them by bribing other couples to remain childless? Might you
be tempted, at least, to hide this fact from your children? If so, there is reason to conclude
that, whatever its advantages, a market in procreation permits would corrupt parenthood in
ways that a fixed quota, however odious, would not.
Tradable Pollution Permits
The distinction between a fine and a fee is also relevant to the debate over how to reduce
greenhouse gases and carbon emissions. Should government set limits on emissions and fine
companies that exceed them? Or should government create tradable pollution permits? The
second approach says in effect that emitting pollution is not like littering but simply a cost of
doing business. But is that right? Or should some moral stigma attach to companies that spew
excessive pollution into the air? To decide this question, we need not only to calculate costs
and benefits; we have to decide what attitudes toward the environment we want to promote.
At the Kyoto conference on global warming (1997), the United States insisted that any
mandatory worldwide emissions standards would have to include a trading scheme, allowing
countries to buy and sell the right to pollute. So, for example, the United States could fulfill its
obligations under the Kyoto Protocol by either reducing its own greenhouse gas emissions or
paying to reduce emissions someplace else. Rather than tax gas-guzzling Hummers at home, it
could
pay to restore an Amazonian rain forest or modernize an old coal-burning factory in a
developing country.
At the time, I wrote an op-ed in The New York Times arguing against the trading scheme. I
worried that letting countries buy the right to pollute would be like letting people pay to
litter. We should try to strengthen, not weaken, the moral stigma attached to despoiling the
environment. I also worried that, if rich countries could buy their way out of the duty to
reduce their own emissions, we would undermine the sense of shared sacrifice necessary to
future global cooperation on the environment.
45??The Times was flooded with scathing lettersmostly from economists, some of them
my Harvard colleagues. I failed to understand the virtue of markets, they suggested, or the
efficiencies of trade, or the elementary principles of economic rationality.
46?? Amid the torrent of criticism, I did receive a sympathetic email from my old college
economics professor. He understood the point I was trying to make, he wrote. But he also
asked a small favor: Would I mind not publicly revealing the identity of the person who had
taught me economics?
Ive since reconsidered my views about emissions trading to some extentthough not for
the doctrinal reasons the economists put forward. Unlike tossing litter out the car window
onto the highway, emitting carbon dioxide is not in itself objectionable. We all do it every
time we exhale. Theres nothing intrinsically wrong with putting CO2 into the air. What is
41
objectionable is doing so in excess, as part of an energy-profligate way of life. That way of life,
and the attitudes that support it, are what we should discourage, even stigmatize.
47??One way of reducing pollution is by government regulation: require
automakers to meet higher emissions standards; ban chemical companies and paper mills
from dumping toxic waste into waterways; require factories to install scrubbers on their
smokestacks. And if the companies fail to abide by the standards, fine them. Thats what the
United States did during the first generation of environmental laws, in the early 1970s.
48?? The regulations, backed by fines, were a way of making companies pay for their
pollution. They also carried a moral message: Shame on us for spewing mercury and
asbestos into lakes and streams and for befouling the air with choking smog. Its not only
hazardous to our health; its no way to treat the earth.
Some people opposed these regulations because they dislike anything that imposes higher
costs on industry. But others, sympathetic to environmental protection, sought more efficient
ways of achieving it. As the prestige of markets grew in the 1980s, and as economic ways of
thinking deepened their hold, some environmental advocates began to favor market-based
approaches to saving the planet. Dont impose emission standards on every factory, they
reasoned; instead, put a price on pollution and let the market do the rest.
49??The simplest way of putting a price on pollution is to tax it. A tax on emissions can be
seen as a fee rather than a fine; but if its big enough, it has the virtue of making the polluters
pay for the damage they inflict. Precisely for this reason, it is politically difficult to enact. So
policy makers have embraced a more market-friendly solution to pollutionemissions
trading.
In 1990, President George H. W. Bush signed into law a plan to reduce acid rain, which is
caused by sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-burning power plants. Rather than set fixed
limits for each power plant, the law gave each utility company a license to pollute a certain
amount, and then let the companies buy and sell the licenses
among themselves. So a company could either reduce its own emissions or buy extra
pollution permits from a company that had managed to pollute less than its allotted amount.
50??Sulfur emissions declined, and the trading scheme was widely regarded as a success.
51?? Then, later in the 1990s, attention turned to global warming. The Kyoto Protocol on
climate change gave countries a choice: they could reduce their own greenhouse gas
emissions or pay another country to reduce theirs. The rationale of this approach is that it
reduces the cost of complying. If its cheaper to replace kerosene lamps in Indian villages than
to abate emissions in the United States, why not pay to replace the lamps?
Despite this inducement, the United States did not join the Kyoto agreement, and
subsequent global climate talks have foundered. But my interest is less in the agreements
themselves than in how they illustrate the moral costs of a global market in the right to
pollute.
With the proposed market in procreation permits, the moral problem is that the system
prompts some couples to bribe others to relinquish their chance to have a child. This erodes
the norm of parental love, by encouraging parents to regard children as alienable, as
commodities for sale. The moral problem with a global market in pollution permits is
different. Here, the issue is not bribery but the outsourcing of an obligation. It arises more
acutely in a global setting than in a domestic one.
Where global cooperation is at stake, allowing rich countries to avoid meaningful
reductions in their own energy use by buying the right to pollute from others (or paying for
programs that enable other countries to pollute less) does damage to two norms: it
entrenches an instrumental attitude toward nature, and it undermines the spirit of shared
42
sacrifice that may be necessary to create a global environmental ethic. If wealthy nations can
buy their way out of an
obligation to reduce their own carbon emissions, then the image of the hiker in the Grand
Canyon may be apt after all. Only now, rather than pay a fine for littering, the wealthy hiker
can toss his beer can with impunity, provided he hires someone to clean up litter in the
Himalayas.
True, the two cases are not identical. Litter is less fungible than greenhouse gases. The beer
can in the Grand Canyon is not offset by a pristine landscape half a world away. Global
warming, by contrast, is a cumulative harm. From the standpoint of the heavens, it doesnt
matter which places on the planet send less carbon to the sky.
But it does matter morally and politically. Letting rich countries buy their way out of
meaningful changes in their own wasteful habits reinforces a bad attitudethat nature is a
dumping ground for those who can afford it. Economists often assume that solving global
warming is simply a matter of designing the right incentive structure and getting countries to
sign on. But this misses a crucial point: norms matter. Global action on climate change may
require that we find our way to a new environmental ethic, a new set of attitudes toward the
natural world we share. Whatever its efficiency, a global market in the right to pollute may
make it harder to cultivate the habits of restraint and shared sacrifice that a responsible
environmental ethic requires.
Carbon Offsets
The growing use of voluntary carbon offsets raises a similar question. Oil companies and
airlines now invite customers to make a monetary payment to neutralize their personal
contribution to global warming. British Petroleums website enables customers to calculate
the amount of CO2 their driving habits produce and to offset their emissions by
making a financial contribution to green energy projects in the developing world. According to
the website, the average British driver can offset a years worth of emissions for about 20.
British Airways offers a similar calculation. For a payment of $16.73, you can neutralize your
share of the greenhouse gases produced by a round-trip flight between New York and
London. The airline will remedy the damage your flight does to the heavens by sending your
$16.73 to a wind farm in Inner Mongolia.
52??Carbon offsets reflect a laudable impulse: to put a price on the damage our energy use
inflicts upon the planet, and to pay the price, person by person, of setting it right. Raising
funds to support reforestation and clean energy projects in the developing world is certainly
worthwhile. But offsets also pose a danger: that those who buy them will consider themselves
absolved of any further responsibility for climate change. The risk is that carbon offsets will
become, at least for some, a painless mechanism to buy our way out of the more
fundamental changes in habits, attitudes, and ways of life that may be required to address
the climate problem.
53??Critics of carbon offsets have compared them to indulgences, the monetary payments
sinners paid the medieval church to offset their transgressions. A website called
www.cheatneutral.com?? parodies carbon offsets by arranging the purchase and sale of
offsets for infidelity. If someone in London feels guilty for cheating on his (or her) spouse, he
can pay someone in Manchester to be faithful, thus offsetting the transgression. The moral
analogy isnt perfect: Betrayal isnt objectionable only, or mainly, because it increases the
sum of unhappiness in the world; its a wrong to a particular person that cant be set right by
43
a virtuous act elsewhere. Carbon emissions, by contrast, are not wrong as such, only in the
aggregate.
54??Still, the critics have a point. Commodifying and individuating
responsibility for greenhouse gases could have the same paradoxical effect as charging for
late pickups at the day-care center, producing more bad behavior rather than less. Heres
how: In a time of global warming, driving a Hummer is seen as less a status symbol than a sign
of wasteful self-indulgence, a kind of gluttony. Hybrids, by contrast, have a certain cachet. But
carbon offsets could undermine these norms by seeming to confer a moral license to pollute.
If Hummer drivers can assuage their guilt by writing a check to an organization that plants
trees in Brazil, they may be less likely to trade in their gas-guzzler for a hybrid. Hummers may
seem respectable rather than irresponsible, and the pressure for broader, collective
responses to climate change could recede.
The scenario Ive described is speculative, of course. The effects on norms of fines, fees,
and other monetary incentives cannot be predicted with certainty and vary from case to case.
My point is simply that markets reflect and promote certain norms, certain ways of valuing
the goods they exchange. In deciding whether to commodify a good, we must therefore
consider more than efficiency and distributive justice. We must also ask whether market
norms will crowd out nonmarket norms, and if so, whether this represents a loss worth caring
about.
I do not claim that promoting virtuous attitudes toward the environment, or parenting, or
education must always trump competing considerations. Bribery sometimes works. And it
may, on occasion, be the right thing to do. If paying underachieving kids to read books brings
a dramatic improvement in reading skills, we might decide to try it, hoping we can teach them
to love learning later. But it is important to remember that it is bribery we are engaged in, a
morally compromised practice that substitutes a lower norm (reading to make money) for a
higher one (reading for the love of it).
As markets and market-oriented thinking reach into spheres of life traditionally governed
by nonmarket normshealth, education, procreation, refugee policy, environmental
protectionthis dilemma arises more and more often. What should we do when the promise
of economic growth or economic efficiency means putting a price on goods we consider
priceless? Sometimes, we find ourselves torn about whether to traffic in morally questionable
markets in hopes of achieving worthy ends.
PAYING TO HUNT A RHINO
Suppose the goal is protecting endangered speciesthe black rhino, for example. From 1970
to 1992, Africas population of black rhinos fell from sixty-five thousand to fewer than twentyfive
hundred. Although hunting endangered species is illegal, most African countries were
unable to protect rhinos from poachers, who sold their horns for great sums in Asia and the
Middle East.
55??In the 1990s and early 2000s, some wildlife conservation groups and South African
biodiversity officials began to consider using market incentives to protect endangered
species. If private ranchers were allowed to sell hunters the right to shoot and kill a limited
number of black rhinos, the ranchers would have an incentive to breed them, care for them,
and fend off poachers.
In 2004, the South African government won approval from the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species to license five black rhino hunts. Black rhinos are notoriously
dangerous and difficult animals to kill, and the chance to hunt one is highly prized among
44
trophy hunters. The first legal hunt in de cades commanded a handsome fee: $150,000, paid
by an American hunter in the financial
industry. Subsequent customers included a Russian petroleum billionaire, who paid to kill
three black rhinos.
The market solution seems to be working. In Kenya, where the hunting of rhinos is still
prohibited, the population of black rhinos has fallen from twenty thousand to about six
hundred, as land is cleared of native vegetation and converted to agriculture and cattle
farming. However, in South Africa, where landowners now have a monetary incentive to
devote large ranches to wildlife, the black rhino population has begun to rebound.
For those who are untroubled by trophy hunting, selling the right to kill a black rhino is a
sensible way of using market incentives to rescue an endangered species. If hunters are
willing to pay $150,000 to hunt a rhino, ranchers have an incentive to raise rhinos and protect
them, thus increasing supply. Its ecotourism with a twist: Come pay to shoot an endangered
black rhino. Youll have an unforgettable experience and serve the cause of conservation at
the same time.
From the standpoint of economic reasoning, the market solution seems a clear winner. It
makes some people better off and no one worse off. The ranchers make money, the hunters
have a chance to stalk and shoot a formidable creature, and an endangered species is brought
back from the brink of extinction. Who could complain?
Well, it depends on the moral status of trophy hunting. If you believe its morally
objectionable to kill wildlife for sport, the market in rhino hunts is a devils bargain, a kind of
moral extortion. You might welcome its good effect on rhino conservation but deplore the
fact that this result is achieved by catering to what you consider the perverse pleasures of
wealthy hunters. It would be like saving an ancient redwood forest from destruction by
allowing loggers to sell wealthy donors the right to carve their initials in some of the trees.
So what should be done? You might reject the market solution on the grounds that the
moral ugliness of trophy hunting trumps the conservation benefits. Or you might decide to
pay the moral extortion and sell the right to hunt some rhinos in hopes of saving the species
from extinction. The right answer partly depends on whether the market really will deliver the
benefits it promises. But it also depends on whether trophy hunters are wrong to treat
wildlife as an object of sport, and if so, on the moral gravity of that wrong.
Once again, we find that market reasoning is incomplete without moral reasoning. We
cant decide whether to buy and sell the right to shoot rhinos without resolving the moral
question about the proper way of valuing them. This is, of course, a contested question on
which people disagree. But the case for markets cannot be disentangled from controversial
questions about the right way to value the goods we exchange.
Big-game hunters instinctively grasp this point. They understand that the moral legitimacy
of their sport (and of paying to hunt rhinos) depends on a certain view about the proper way
of regarding wildlife. Some trophy hunters claim to venerate their prey, and maintain that
killing a great and powerful creature is a form of respect. A Russian businessman who paid to
hunt a black rhino in 2007 said, I shot it because it was one of the biggest compliments I
could give to the black rhino.
56?? Critics will say that killing a creature is an odd way of venerating it. Whether trophy
hunting values wildlife in an appropriate way is a moral question at the heart of the debate.
Which brings us back to attitudes and norms: Whether to create a market in the hunting of
endangered species depends not only on whether it increases their number but also on
whether it expresses and promotes the right way of valuing them.
The black rhino market is morally complex because it seeks to
45
protect an endangered species by promoting questionable attitudes toward wildlife. Here
is another hunting story that poses an even tougher test for market reasoning.
PAYING TO SHOOT A WALRUS
For centuries, the Atlantic walrus was as abundant in the Arctic region of Canada as the bison
in the American West. Valued for its meat, skin, blubber oil, and ivory tusks, the massive,
defenseless marine mammal was easy prey for hunters, and by the late nineteenth century
the population had been decimated. In 1928, Canada banned walrus hunting, with a small
exception for the Inuit, aboriginal subsistence hunters whose way of life had revolved around
the walrus hunt for forty-five hundred years.
57??In the 1990s, Inuit leaders approached the Canadian government with a proposal. Why not
allow the Inuit to sell the right to kill some of their walrus quota to big-game hunters? The
number of walruses killed would remain the same. The Inuit would collect the hunting fees,
serve as guides to the trophy hunters, supervise the kill, and keep the meat and skins as they
had always done. The scheme would improve the economic well-being of a poor community
without exceeding the existing quota. The Canadian government agreed.
Today, rich trophy hunters from around the world make their way to the Arctic for the
chance to shoot a walrus. They pay $6,000 to $6,500 for the privilege. They do not come for
the thrill of the chase or the challenge of stalking an elusive prey. Walruses are unthreatening
creatures that move slowly and are no match for hunters
with guns. In a compelling account in The New York Times Magazine, C. J. Chivers
compared walrus hunting under Inuit supervision to a long boat ride to shoot a very large
beanbag chair.
58??The guides maneuver the boat to within fifteen yards of the walrus and tell the hunter
when to shoot. Chivers described the scene as a game hunter from Texas shot his prey: The
hunters bullet smacked the bull on the neck, jerking its head and knocking the animal to its
side. Blood spouted from the entry hole. The bull lay motionless. [The hunter] put down his
rifle and picked up his video camera. The Inuit crew then set about the hard work of pulling
the dead walrus onto an ice floe and carving up the carcass.
The appeal of such a hunt is difficult to fathom. It involves no challenge, making it less a
sport than a kind of lethal tourism. The hunter cannot even display the remains of his prey on
his trophy wall back home. Walruses are protected in the United States, and its illegal to
bring their body parts into the country.
So why shoot a walrus? Apparently, to fulfill the goal of killing one specimen of every
creature on lists provided by hunting clubsfor example, the African Big Five (leopard, lion,
elephant, rhino, and Cape buffalo) or the Arctic Grand Slam (caribou, musk ox, polar bear,
and walrus).
Its hardly an admirable goal; many people find it repugnant. But remember, markets dont
pass judgment on the desires they satisfy. In fact, from the standpoint of market reasoning,
theres much to be said for allowing the Inuit to sell their right to shoot a certain number of
walruses. The Inuit gain a new source of income, and the list hunters gain the chance to
complete their roster of creatures killed, all without exceeding the existing quota. In this
respect, selling the right to kill a walrus is like selling the right to procreate or to pollute.
Once you have a quota, market logic dictates that allowing tradable permits improves the
general welfare. It makes some people better off without making anyone worse off.
And yet there is something morally disagreeable about the market in walrus killing. Lets
assume, for the sake of argument, that it is reasonable to permit the Inuit to carry on with
46
subsistence walrus hunting, as theyve done for centuries. Allowing them to sell the right to
kill walruses is still morally objectionable, for two reasons.
One is that this bizarre market caters to a perverse desire that should carry no weight in
any calculus of social utility. Whatever one thinks of big-game hunting, this is something else.
The desire to kill a helpless mammal at close range, without any challenge or chase, simply to
complete a list, is not worthy of being fulfilled, even if doing so provides extra income for the
Inuit. Second, for the Inuit to sell outsiders the right to kill their allotted walruses corrupts the
meaning and purpose of the exemption accorded their community in the first place. Its one
thing to honor the Inuit way of life and to respect its long-standing reliance on subsistence
walrus hunting. Its quite another to convert that privilege into a cash concession in killing on
the side.
INCENTIVES AND MORAL ENTANGLEMENTS
During the second half of the twentieth century, Paul Samuelsons Economics was the leading
economics textbook in the country. I recently looked at an early (1958) edition of his book to
see what he took economics to be. He identified economics with its traditional subject
matter: the world of prices, wages, interest rates, stocks and bonds, banks and credit, taxes
and expenditure. The task of economics
was concrete and circumscribed: to explain how depressions, unemployment, and inflation
can be avoided, to study the principles that tell us how productivity can be kept high and
how peoples standards of living can be improved.
59??Today, economics has wandered quite a distance from its traditional subject matter.
Consider this definition of an economy offered by Greg Mankiw in a recent edition of his own
influential economics textbook: There is no mystery to what an economy is. An economy is
just a group of people interacting with one another as they go about their lives.
In this account, economics is about not only the production, distribution, and consumption
of material goods but also about human interaction in general and the principles by which
individuals make decisions. One of the most important of these principles, Mankiw observes,
is that people respond to incentives.
60??Talk of incentives has become so pervasive in contemporary economics that it has come
to define the discipline. In the opening pages of Freakonomics, Steven D. Levitt, an economist
at the University of Chicago, and Stephen J. Dubner declare that incentives are the
cornerstone of modern life and that economics is, at root, the study of incentives.
61??It is easy to miss the novelty of this definition. The language of incentives is a recent
development in economic thought. The word incentive does not appear in the writings of
Adam Smith or other classical economists.
62?? In fact, it didnt enter economic discourse until the twentieth century and didnt
become prominent until the 1980s and 1990s. The Oxford English Dictionary finds its first
use in the context of economics in 1943, in Readers Digest: Mr. Charles E. Wilson  is urging
war industries to adopt incentive paythat is, to pay workers more if they produce more.
The use of the word
incentives rose sharply in the second half of the twentieth century, as markets and
market thinking deepened their hold. According to a Google book search, the incidence of the
term increased by over 400 percent from the 1940s to the 1990s.
63??Conceiving economics as the study of incentives does more than extend the reach of
markets into everyday life. It also casts the economist in an activist role. The shadow prices
that Gary Becker invoked in the 1970s to explain human behavior were implicit, not actual.
47
They were metaphorical prices that the economist imagines, posits, or infers. Incentives, by
contrast, are interventions that the economist (or policy maker) designs, engineers, and
imposes on the world. They are ways of getting people to lose weight, or work harder, or
pollute less. Economists love incentives, write Levitt and Dubner. They love to dream them
up and enact them, study them and tinker with them. The typical economist believes the
world has not yet invented a problem that he cannot fix if given a free hand to design the
proper incentive scheme. His solution may not always be prettyit may involve coercion or
exorbitant penalties or the violation of civil libertiesbut the original problem, rest assured,
will be fixed. An incentive is a bullet, a lever, a key: an often tiny object with astonishing
power to change a situation.
64??This is a far cry from Adam Smiths image of the market as an invisible hand. Once
incentives become the cornerstone of modern life, the market appears as a heavy hand,
and a manipulative one. (Recall the cash incentives for sterilization and good grades.) Most
incentives dont come about organically, Levitt and Dubner observe. Someonean
economist or a politician or a parenthas to invent them.
65??The growing use of incentives in contemporary life, and the need
for someone deliberately to invent them, is reflected in an ungainly new verb that has
gained currency of late: incentivize. According to the OED, to incentivize is to motivate or
encourage (a person, esp. an employee or customer) by providing a (usually financial)
incentive. The word dates to 1968 but has become popular in the last decade, especially
among economists, corporate executives, bureaucrats, policy analysts, politicians, and
editorial writers. In books, the word scarcely appeared until around 1990. Since then, its use
has soared by more than 1,400 percent.
66?? A LexisNexis search of major newspapers reveals a similar trend:
Appearance of incentivize or incentivise in major newspapers
67??1980s  481990s  4492000s  6159201011  5885
Recently, incentivize has entered the parlance of presidents. George H. W. Bush, the first
U.S. president to use the term in public remarks, used it twice. Bill Clinton used it only once in
eight years, as did George W. Bush. In his first three years in office, Barack Obama has used
incentivize twenty-nine times. He hopes to incentivize doctors, hospitals, and health-care
providers to give more attention to preventive care and wants to poke, prod, [and]
incentivize banks to provide loans to responsible homeowners and small businesses.
68??Britains prime minister, David Cameron, is also fond of the word. Speaking to bankers
and business leaders, he called for doing more to incentivise a risk-taking investment
culture. Speaking
to the British people after the London riots of 2011, he complained that some of the worst
aspects of human nature had been tolerated, indulged, even sometimes incentivized, by
the state and its agencies.
69??Despite their new incentivizing bent, most economists continue to insist on the
distinction between economics and ethics, between market reasoning and moral reasoning.
Economics simply doesnt traffic in morality, Levitt and Dubner explain. Morality
represents the way we would like the world to work, and economics represents how it
actually does work.
70??The notion that economics is a value-free science independent of moral and political
48
philosophy has always been questionable. But the vaunting ambition of economics today
makes this claim especially difficult to defend. The more markets extend their reach into
noneconomic spheres of life, the more entangled they become with moral questions.
Consider economic efficiency. Why care about it? Presumably, for the sake of maximizing
social utility, understood as the sum of peoples preferences. As Mankiw explains, an efficient
allocation of resources maximizes the economic well-being of all members of society.
71?? Why maximize social utility? Most economists either ignore this question or fall back on
some version of utilitarian moral philosophy.
But utilitarianism is open to some familiar objections. The objection most relevant to
market reasoning asks why we should maximize the satisfaction of preferences regardless of
their moral worth. If some people like opera and others like dogfights or mud wrestling, must
we really be nonjudgmental and give these preferences equal weight in the utilitarian
calculus?
72?? When market reasoning is concerned with material goods, such as cars, toasters, and
flat-screen
televisions, this objection doesnt loom large; its reasonable to assume that the value of
the goods is simply a matter of consumer preference. But when market reasoning is applied
to sex, procreation, child rearing, education, health, criminal punishment, immigration policy,
and environmental protection, its less plausible to assume that everyones preferences are
equally worthwhile. In morally charged arenas such as these, some ways of valuing goods may
be higher, more appropriate than others. And if thats the case, its unclear why we should
satisfy preferences indiscriminately, without inquiring into their moral worth. (Should your
desire to teach a child to read really count equally with your neighbors desire to shoot a
walrus at point-blank range?)
So when market reasoning travels beyond the domain of material goods, it must traffic in
morality, unless it wants blindly to maximize social utility without regard for the moral worth
of the preferences it satisfies.
Theres a further reason that the expansion of markets complicates the distinction between
market reasoning and moral reasoning, between explaining the world and improving it. One
of the central principles of economics is the price effectwhen prices go up, people buy less
of a good, and when prices go down, they buy more. This principle is generally reliable when
were talking about the market for, say, flat-screen TVs.
But as weve seen, it is less reliable when applied to social practices governed by
nonmarket norms, like arriving on time to pick up your child at the day-care center. When the
price of arriving late went up (from no charge), late pickups increased. This result confounds
the standard price effect. But its understandable if you recognize that marketizing a good can
change its meaning. Putting a price on late pickups changed the norm. What was once seen as
a moral
obligation to arrive on timeto spare the teachers an inconveniencewas now seen as a
market relationship, in which late-arriving parents could simply pay teachers for the service of
staying longer. As a result, the incentive backfired.
The day-care story shows that, as markets reach into spheres of life governed by
nonmarket norms, the standard price effect may not hold. Raising the (economic) cost of
coming late led to more late pickups, not fewer. So to explain the world, economists have to
figure out whether putting a price on an activity will crowd out nonmarket norms. To do so,
they have to investigate the moral understandings that inform a given practice and determine
whether marketizing the practice (by providing a financial incentive or disincentive) will
displace them.
49
At this point, the economist might concede that, in order to explain the world, he or she
must engage in moral psychology or anthropology, to figure out what norms prevail and how
markets will affect them. But why does this mean that moral philosophy must enter the
picture? For the following reason:
Where markets erode nonmarket norms, the economist (or someone) has to decide
whether this represents a loss worth caring about. Should we care whether parents stop
feeling guilty for picking up their children late and come to view their relationship with the
teachers in more instrumental terms? Should we care if paying children to read books leads
them to view reading as a job for pay and diminishes the joy of reading for its own sake? The
answer will vary from case to case. But the question carries us beyond predicting whether a
financial incentive will work. It requires that we make a moral assessment: What is the moral
importance of the attitudes and norms that money may erode or crowd out? Would the loss
of nonmarket norms and expectations change the character of the activity
in ways we would (or at least should) regret? If so, should we avoid introducing financial
incentives into the activity, even though they might do some good?
The answer will depend on the purpose and character of the activity in question and the
norms that define it. Even day-care centers differ in this respect. Displacing shared
expectations of mutual obligation may be more damaging in a cooperative, where parents
volunteer a certain number of hours each week, than in a conventional day-care
establishment, where parents pay the teachers to look after the children and then go about
their day. But it is clear in any case that we are on moral terrain. To decide whether to rely on
financial incentives, we need to ask whether those incentives will corrupt attitudes and norms
worth protecting. To answer this question, market reasoning must become moral reasoning.
The economist has to traffic in morality after all.
50
How Markets Crowd Out Morals
Are there some things that money should not be able to buy? If so, how can we decide which
goods and activities are properly bought and sold, and which are not? I suggest we approach
these questions by asking a slightly different one: Are there some things that money cannot
buy?
WHAT MONEY CAN AND CANNOT BUY
Most people would say yes, there are. Consider friendship. Suppose you want more friends
than you have. Would you try to buy some? Not likely. A moments reflection would lead you
to realize that it wouldnt work. A hired friend is not the same as a real one. You could hire
people to do some of the things that friends typically dopicking up your mail when youre
out of town, looking after your children in a pinch, or, in the case of a therapist, listening to
your woes and offering sympathetic advice. Until recently, you could even bolster your online
popularity by hiring some good-looking friends
for your Facebook pagefor 99 per friend per month. (The phony-friend website was shut
down when it emerged that the photos being used, mostly of models, were unauthorized.)
1?? Although all of these services can be bought, you cant actually buy a friend. Somehow, the
money that buys the friendship dissolves it, or turns it into something else.
Or consider the Nobel Prize. Suppose you desperately want a Nobel Prize but fail to get one
in the usual way. It might occur to you to buy one. But you would quickly realize that it
wouldnt work. The Nobel Prize is not the kind of thing that money can buy. Nor is the Most
Valuable Player award of the American League. You could buy the trophy if some previous
winner is willing to sell it, and you could display it in your living room. But you could not buy
the award itself.
This is not only because the Nobel committee and the American League dont offer these
awards for sale. Even if they auctioned off, say, one Nobel Prize each year, the bought award
would not be the same as the real thing. The market exchange would dissolve the good that
gives the prize its value. This is because the Nobel Prize is an honorific good. To buy it is to
undermine the good you are seeking. Once word got out that the prize had been bought, the
award would no longer convey or express the honor and recognition that people receive
when they are awarded a Nobel Prize.
The same is true of baseballs MVP awards. They too are honorific goods, whose value
would be dissolved if bought rather than earned by a season of game-winning home runs or
other heroics. Theres a difference, of course, between a trophy, which symbolizes an award,
and the award itself. It turns out that some winners of Hollywoods Academy Awards have
sold their Oscar statuettes, or left them to heirs who have done so. Some of these Oscars
have been auctioned by Sothebys and other auction houses. In 1999, Michael
Jackson paid $1.54 million for the best-picture Oscar for Gone with the Wind. The academy
that awards the Oscars opposes such sales and now requires Oscar recipients to sign an
agreement promising not to sell them. It wants to avoid turning the iconic statuettes into
commercial collectibles. Whether or not collectors are able to buy the trophies, it is obvious
that buying the Academy Award for best actress is not the same as winning it.
2??These fairly obvious examples offer a clue to the more challenging question that
concerns us: Are there some things that money can buy but shouldnt? Consider a good that
51
can be bought but whose buying and selling is morally controversiala human kidney, for
example. Some people defend markets in organs for transplantation; others find such
markets morally objectionable. If its wrong to buy a kidney, the problem is not, as with the
Nobel Prize, that the money dissolves the good. The kidney will work (assuming a good
match) regardless of the monetary payment. So to determine whether kidneys should or
shouldnt be up for sale, we have to engage in a moral inquiry. We have to examine the
arguments for and against organ sales and determine which are more persuasive.
Or consider baby selling. Some years ago, Judge Richard Posner, a leading figure in the law
and economics movement, proposed the use of markets to allocate babies put up for
adoption. He acknowledged that more desirable babies would command higher prices than
less desirable ones. But he argued that the free market would do a better job of allocating
babies than the current system of adoption, which allows adoption agencies to charge certain
fees but not to auction babies or charge a market price.
3??Many people disagree with Posners proposal and maintain that children should not be
bought and sold, no matter how efficient the market. In thinking through this controversy, its
worth noticing a
distinctive feature of it: like a markets in kidneys, a market in babies would not dissolve the
good the buyers seek to acquire. A bought baby differs, in this respect, from a bought friend
or Nobel Prize. If there were a market in babies for adoption, people who paid the going price
would acquire what they wanteda child. Whether such a market is morally objectionable is
a further question.
So it seems, at first glance, that there is a sharp distinction between two kinds of goods: the
things (like friends and Nobel Prizes) that money cant buy, and the things (like kidneys and
children) that money can buy but arguably shouldnt. But I would like to suggest that this
distinction is less clear than it first appears. If we look more closely, we can glimpse a
connection between the obvious cases, in which the monetary exchange spoils the good
being bought, and the controversial cases, in which the good survives the selling but is
arguably degraded, or corrupted, or diminished as a result.
BOUGHT APOLOGIES AND WEDDING TOASTS
We can explore this connection by considering some cases intermediate between friendship
and kidneys. If you cant buy friendship, what about tokens of friendship, or expressions of
intimacy, affection, or contrition?
In 2001, The New York Times published a story about a company in China that offers an
unusual service: if you need to apologize to someonean estranged lover or business partner
with whom youve had a falling outand you cant quite bring yourself to do so in person,
you can hire the Tianjin Apology company to apologize on your behalf. The motto of the
company is, We say sorry for you. According to the article, the professional apologizers are
middle-aged
men and women with college degrees who dress in somber suits. They are lawyers, social
workers and teachers with excellent verbal ability and significant life experience, who are
given additional training in counseling.
4??I dont know whether the company is successful, or even whether it still exists. But
reading about it made me wonder: Does a bought apology work? If someone wronged or
offended you, and then sent a hired apologizer to make amends, would you be satisfied? It
might depend on the circumstances, or perhaps even the cost. Would you consider an
expensive apology more meaningful than a cheap one? Or is the enactment of the apology by
52
the person who owes it constitutive of contrition, such that it cant be outsourced? If no
bought apology, however extravagant, could do the work of a personal one, then apologies,
like friends, are the kind of thing that money cannot buy.
Consider another social practice closely connected to friendshipa wedding toast to the
bride and groom. Traditionally, such toasts are warm, funny, heartfelt expressions of good
wishes delivered by the best man, usually the grooms closest friend. But its not easy to
compose an elegant wedding speech, and many best men dont feel up to the task. So some
have resorted to buying wedding toasts online.
5??ThePerfectToast.com?? is one of the leading websites offering ghostwritten wedding
speeches. Its been in business since 1997. You answer a questionnaire onlineabout how
the bride and groom met, how you would describe them, whether you want a humorous
speech or a sentimental oneand within three business days you receive a professionally
written custom toast of three to five minutes. The price is $149, payable by credit card. For
those who cant afford a bespoke wedding toast, other websites, such as
InstantWeddingToasts.com??, sell standard prewritten wedding speeches for $19.95,
including a money-back guarantee.
6??Suppose, on your wedding day, your best man delivers a heartwarming toast, a speech
so moving it brings tears to your eyes. You later learn that he didnt write it himself but
bought it online. Would you care? Would the toast mean less than it did at first, before you
knew it was written by a paid professional? Most of us would probably say yes, the bought
wedding toast has less value than an authentic one.
It might be argued that presidents and prime ministers routinely employ speechwriters,
and no one faults them for it. But a wedding toast is not a State of the Union address. It is an
expression of friendship. Although a bought toast might work in the sense of achieving its
desired effect, that effect might depend on an element of deception. Heres a test: If, seized
with anxiety at the prospect of giving a speech at your best friends wedding, you purchased a
moving, sentimental masterpiece online, would you reveal this fact, or try to cover it up? If a
bought toast depends for its effect on concealing its provenance, thats a reason to suspect
its a corrupt version of the real thing.
Apologies and wedding toasts are goods that can, in a sense, be bought. But buying and
selling them changes their character and diminishes their value.
THE CASE AGAINST GIFTS
Consider now another expression of friendshipgift giving. Unlike wedding speeches, gifts
have an unavoidably material aspect. But with some gifts, the monetary aspect is relatively
obscure; with others, it is explicit. Recent de cades have brought a trend toward the
monetization of gifts, yet another example of the increasing commodification of social life.
Economists dont like gifts. Or to be more precise, they have a hard time making sense of
gift giving as a rational social practice. From the standpoint of market reasoning, it is almost
always better to give cash rather than a gift. If you assume that people generally know their
own preferences best, and that the point of giving a gift is to make your friend or loved one
happy, then its hard to beat a monetary payment. Even if you have exquisite taste, your
friend may not like the tie or necklace you pick out. So if you really want to maximize the
welfare your gift provides, dont buy a present; simply give the money you would have spent.
Your friend or lover can either spend the cash on the item you would have bought, or (more
likely) on something that brings even greater pleasure.
53
This is the logic of the economic case against gift giving. It is subject to a few qualifications.
If you come across an item that your friend would like but is unfamiliar withthe latest hightech
gadget, for exampleits possible this gift would give your ill-informed friend more
pleasure than something he or she would have bought with the cash equivalent. But this is a
special case that is consistent with the economists basic assumption that the purpose of gift
giving is to maximize the welfare, or utility, of the recipient.
Joel Waldfogel, an economist at the University of Pennsylvania, has taken up the economic
inefficiency of gift giving as a personal cause. By inefficiency, he means the gap between the
value to you (maybe very little) of the $120 argyle sweater your aunt gave you for your
birthday, and the value of what you would have bought (an iPod, say) had she given you the
cash. In 1993, Waldfogel drew attention to the epidemic of squandered utility associated with
holiday gift giving in an article called The Deadweight Loss of Christmas. He updated and
elaborated the theme in a recent book, Scroogenomics: Why You Shouldnt Buy Presents for
the Holidays: The bottom
line is that when other people do our shopping, for clothes or music or whatever, its pretty
unlikely that theyll choose as well as we would have chosen for ourselves. We can expect
their choices, no matter how well intentioned, to miss the mark. Relative to how much
satisfaction their expenditures could have given us, their choices destroy value.
7??Applying standard market reasoning, Waldfogel concludes that it would be better, in
most cases, to give cash: Economic theoryand common senselead us to expect that
buying stuff for ourselves will create more satisfaction, per euro, dollar, or shekel spent, than
does buying stuff for others  Buying gifts typically destroys value and can only, in the
unlikely best special case, be as good as giving cash.
8??Beyond playing out the economic logic against gift giving, Waldfogel has conducted
surveys to measure how much value this inefficient practice destroys. He asks gift recipients
to estimate the monetary value of the gifts theyve received, and the amount they would
have been willing to pay for them. His conclusion: We value items we receive as gifts 20
percent less, per dollar spent, than items we buy for ourselves. This 20 percent figure
enables Waldfogel to estimate the total value destruction brought about, nationwide, by
holiday gift giving: Given the $65 billion in U.S. holiday spending per year, that means we get
$13 billion less in satisfaction than we would receive if we spent that money the usual way
carefully, on ourselves. Americans celebrate the holidays with an orgy of value destruction.
9??If gift giving is a massively wasteful and inefficient activity, why do we persist in it? It isnt
easy to answer this question within standard economic assumptions. In his economics
textbook, Gregory Mankiw tries gamely to do so. He begins by observing that gift giving is a
strange custom but concedes that its generally a bad idea to
give your boyfriend or girlfriend cash instead of a birthday present. But why?
Mankiws explanation is that gift giving is a mode of signaling, an economists term for
using markets to overcome information asymmetries. So, for example, a firm with a good
product buys expensive advertising, not only to persuade customers directly but also to
signal to them that it is confident enough in the quality of its product to undertake a costly
advertising campaign. In a similar way, Mankiw suggests, gift giving serves a signaling
function. A man contemplating a gift for his girlfriend has private information that the
girlfriend would like to know: Does he really love her? Choosing a good gift for her is a signal
of his love. Since it takes time and effort to look for a gift, choosing an apt one is a way for
him to convey the private information of his love for her.
10??This is a strangely wooden way to think about lovers and gifts. Signaling love is not the
same as expressing it. To speak of signaling wrongly assumes that love is a piece of private
54
information that one party reports to the other. If this were the case, then cash would work
as wellthe higher the payment, the stronger the signal, and the greater (presumably) the
love. But love is not only, or mainly, a matter of private information. It is a way of being with
and responding to another person. Giving, especially attentive giving, can be an expression of
it. On the expressive account, a good gift not only aims to please, in the sense of satisfying the
consumer preferences of the recipient. It also engages and connects with the recipient, in a
way that reflects a certain intimacy. This is why thoughtfulness matters.
Not all gifts, of course, can be expressive in this way. If you are attending the wedding of a
distant cousin, or the bar mitzvah of a business associates child, it is probably better to buy
something from the wedding registry or give cash. But to give money rather
than a well-chosen gift to a friend, lover, or spouse is to convey a certain thoughtless
indifference. Its like buying your way out of attentiveness.
Economists know that gifts have an expressive dimension, even if the tenets of their
discipline cant account for it. The economist in me says the best gift is cash, writes Alex
Tabarrok, an economist and blogger. The rest of me rebels. He offers a good
counterexample to the utilitarian notion that the ideal gift is an item we would have bought
for ourselves: Suppose someone gives you $100, and you buy a set of tires for your car. This is
what maximizes your utility. Still, you might not be terribly happy if your lover gave you car
tires for your birthday. In most cases, Tabarrok points out, wed rather the gift giver buy us
something less mundane, something we wouldnt buy for ourselves. From our intimates at
least, wed rather receive a gift that speaks to the wild self, the passionate self, the romantic
self.
11??I think hes onto something. The reason gift giving is not always an irrational departure
from efficient utility maximizing is that gifts arent only about utility. Some gifts are expressive
of relationships that engage, challenge, and reinterpret our identities. This is because
friendship is about more than being useful to one another. It is also about growing in
character and self-knowledge in the company of others. As Aristotle taught, friendship at its
best has a formative, educative purpose. To monetize all forms of giving among friends can
corrupt friendship by suffusing it with utilitarian norms.
Even economists who view gift giving in utilitarian terms cant help noticing that cash gifts
are the exception, not the rule, especially among peers, spouses, and significant others. For
Waldfogel, this is a source of the inefficiency he decries. So what, in his view, motivates
people to persist in a habit that produces a massive
destruction of value? Its simply the fact that cash is considered a tacky gift that carries a
stigma. He does not ask whether people are right or wrong to regard cash gifts as tacky.
Instead, he treats the stigma as a brute sociological fact of no normative significance apart
from its unfortunate tendency to reduce utility.
12??The only reason that so much Christmas giving is in-kind rather than cash is the stigma
of cash giving, Waldfogel writes. If there were no stigma, then givers would give cash, and
recipients would choose items that they really want, resulting in the most possible
satisfaction given the amounts spent.
13?? Stephen Dubner and Steven Levitt offer a similar view: the reluctance to give cash gifts
is, for the most part, a social taboo that crushes the economists dream of a beautifully
efficient exchange.
14??The economic analysis of gift giving illustrates, in a small domain, two revealing features
of market reasoning. First, it shows how market reasoning smuggles in certain moral
judgments, despite its claim to be value neutral. Waldfogel doesnt assess the validity of the
55
stigma against cash gifts; he never asks whether it might be justified. He simply assumes it is
an irrational obstacle to utility, a dysfunctional institution that should ideally be overcome.
15?? He doesnt consider the possibility that the stigma against monetary gifts may reflect
norms worth preserving, such as norms of attentiveness bound up with friendship.
To insist that the purpose of all gifts is to maximize utility is to assume, without argument,
that the utility-maximizing conception of friendship is morally the most appropriate one, and
that the right way to treat friends is to satisfy their preferencesnot to challenge or deepen
or complicate them.
So the economic case against gift giving is not morally neutral. It presupposes a certain
conception of friendship, one that many
consider impoverished. And yet, whatever its moral deficiency, the economic approach to
gift giving is gradually taking hold. This brings us to the second revealing feature of the gift
example. Contestable though its moral assumptions may be, the economic way of thinking
about gifts is coming to be true. Over the past two de cades, the monetary aspect of gift
giving has come closer to the surface.
MONETIZING GIFTS
Consider the rise of gift cards. Rather than search for just the right gift, holiday shoppers are
increasingly giving certificates or cards with a certain monetary value that can be redeemed
for merchandise at retail stores. Gift cards represent a halfway house between choosing a
specific gift and giving cash. They make life easier for shoppers and give recipients a greater
range of options. A $50 gift card from Target, Walmart, or Saks Fifth Avenue avoids the
value-destroying loss of a sweater two sizes too small, by letting the recipient choose
something he or she really wants. And yet its somehow different from giving money. True,
the recipient knows exactly how much you spent; the monetary value is explicit. But despite
this fact, a gift card from a particular store carries less of a stigma than simply giving cash.
Perhaps the element of thoughtfulness conveyed by the choice of an appropriate store eases
the stigma, at least to some degree.
The trend toward the monetizing of holiday gifts gathered momentum in the 1990s, when
growing numbers of shoppers began giving gift certificates. In the late 1990s, the shift to
plastic gift cards with magnetic strips accelerated the trend. From 1998 to 2010, annual sales
of gift cards increased almost eightfold, to more than $90 billion. According to consumer
surveys, gift cards are now the most
popular holiday gift requestahead of clothing, video games, consumer electronics,
jewelry, and other items.
16??Traditionalists bemoan this trend. Judith Martin, the etiquette columnist known as Miss
Manners, complains that gift cards have taken the heart and soul out of the holiday. Youre
basically paying somebodypaying them to go away. Liz Pulliam Weston, a personal finance
columnist, worries that the art of gift-giving is quickly devolving into an entirely commercial
exchange. How much longer, she asks, until we simply start thrusting wads of dollar bills at
each other?
17??From the standpoint of economic reasoning, the turn to gift cards is a step in the right
direction. Going all the way to wads of dollar bills would be even better. The reason?
Although gift cards reduce the deadweight loss of presents, they dont eliminate it entirely.
Suppose your uncle gives you a $100 gift card redeemable at Home Depot. That would be
better than a hundred-dollar tool kit you dont want. But if you are not keen on home
56
improvement items, youd rather have the cash. Money, after all, is like a gift card that is
redeemable anywhere.
Not surprisingly, a market solution to this problem has already appeared. A number of
online companies now buy gift cards for cash (at a price lower than their face value) and resell
them. So, for example, a company called Plastic Jungle will buy your $100 Home Depot gift
card for $80 and then resell it for $93. The discount rate varies according to the popularity of
the store. For a $100 gift card from Walmart or Target, Plastic Jungle will pay $91. A $100 card
from Barnes & Noble, sadly, yields only $77, slightly less than Burger King ($79).
18??For economists concerned with the deadweight loss of gifts, this secondary market
quantifies the utility loss you impose on recipients by giving gift cards rather than money: the
higher the discount rate,
the greater the gap between the value of a gift card and the value of cash. Of course, none
of this captures the thoughtfulness and attentiveness that traditional gift giving expresses.
These virtues are attenuated in the shift from presents to gift cards and, finally, to cash.
One economist who studies gift cards suggests a way to reconcile the economic efficiency
of cash with the old-fashioned virtue of thoughtfulness: Gift-givers planning on giving a gift
card might want to bear in mind the possible benefit of a cash gift with a note to the recipient
suggesting that the money could be spent at [insert the name of store here]to add the
thought that counts.
19??Giving money along with a cheery note advising the recipient where to spend it is the
ultimate deconstructed gift. Its like packaging the utilitarian component and the expressive
norm in two separate boxes, tied together with a bow.
My favorite example of the commodification of gift giving is a recently patented system for
electronic regifting. An article in The New York Times describes it as follows: Suppose your
aunt gives you a fruitcake for Christmas. The fruitcake company sends you an email informing
you of the thoughtful gift and giving you the option of accepting delivery, exchanging it for
something else, or sending the fruitcake to an unsuspecting person on your gift list. Since the
transaction takes place online, you dont have to bother repacking the item and taking it to
the post office. If you opt for regifting, the new recipient is offered the same options. So its
possible that the unwanted fruitcake could ricochet its way indefinitely through cyberspace.
20??One possible snafu: depending on the retailers disclosure policy, each recipient on the
fruitcakes journey might be able to learn of its itinerary. This could be embarrassing. Learning
that the fruitcake had been cast aside by several previous recipients and was now
being fobbed off on you would likely dampen your gratitude for the gift and dissolve its
expressive value. It would be a bit like discovering that your best friend had purchased that
heartwarming wedding toast online.
BOUGHT HONOR
Although money cant buy friendship, it can buy tokens and expressions of friendshipup to
a point. As weve seen, converting apologies, wedding toasts, and gifts into commodities
doesnt destroy them altogether. But it does diminish them. The reason it diminishes them is
related to the reason that money cant buy friends: Friendship and the social practices that
sustain it are constituted by certain norms, attitudes, and virtues. Commodifying these
practices displaces these normssympathy, generosity, thoughtfulness, attentivenessand
replaces them with market values.
A hired friend is not the same as a real one; almost everyone can tell the difference. The
only exception I can think of is Jim Carreys character in the movie The Truman Show. The
57
character lives his entire life in a seemingly halcyon town that, unbeknownst to him, is
actually the set of a reality television show. It takes Carrey some time to figure out that his
wife and his best friend are hired actors. But of course he didnt hire them; the television
producer did.
The point of the friendship analogy is this: the reason we (normally) cant buy friendsthe
purchase would destroy the relationshipsheds light on how markets corrupt expressions of
friendship. A bought apology or wedding toast, though recognizable as something akin to an
authentic one, is nonetheless tainted and diminished. Money can buy these things, but only in
somewhat degraded form.
Honorific goods are vulnerable to corruption in a similar way. A Nobel Prize cant be
bought. But what about other forms of honor and recognition? Consider honorary degrees.
Colleges and universities confer honorary degrees on distinguished scholars, scientists, artists,
and public officials. But some recipients are philanthropists who have contributed large sums
to the institution bestowing the honor. Are such degrees bought, in effect, or are they
genuinely honorific?
It can be ambiguous. If the colleges reasons were baldly stated, the transparency would
dissolve the good. Suppose the citation at commencement read: We confer honorary
degrees upon distinguished scientists and artists for their achievements. But we award you
this degree in thanks for the $10 million you gave us to build a new library. Such an award
would scarcely count as an honorary degree. Of course, citations are never written that way.
They speak of public service, philanthropic commitment, and dedication to the universitys
missionan honorific vocabulary that blurs the distinction between an honorary degree and
a bought one.
Similar questions can be asked about the buying and selling of admission to elite
universities. Universities dont hold auctions for admission, at least not explicitly. Many
selective colleges and universities could increase their revenues if they sold seats in the
freshman class to the highest bidder. But even if they wanted to maximize revenue,
universities would not auction off all the places. Doing so would reduce demand, not only by
reducing academic quality but also by undermining the honorific aspect of admission. It would
be hard to take pride in being admitted (or having your child admitted) to Stanford or Prince
ton if admission were routinely purchased and if this were widely known. At most, it would be
the kind of pride associated with being able to buy a yacht.
Suppose, however, that most of the places were allocated according to merit, but a few
were quietly made available for sale. And lets also suppose that many factors entered into
admissions decisionsgrades; SAT scores; extracurricular activities; racial, ethnic, and
geographical diversity; athletic prowess; legacy status (being the child of an alumnus)so
that it was hard to tell, in any given case, which factors were decisive. Under conditions such
as these, universities could sell some places to wealthy donors without undermining the
honor that people associate with admission to a top school.
Critics of higher education claim that this scenario comes close to describing what actually
goes on at many colleges and universities today. They describe legacy preferences, the
admissions edge given to children of alumni, as a form of affirmative action for the affluent.
And they point to cases in which universities have relaxed their admissions standards for less
than outstanding applicants whose parents, though not alumni, are wealthy and likely to
make a substantial contribution to the school.
21?? Defenders of these practices argue that private universities depend heavily on financial
contributions from alumni and wealthy donors, and that such contributions enable
universities to provide scholarships and financial aid to less affluent students.
58
22??So, unlike the Nobel Prize, college admission is a good that can be bought and sold,
provided the buying and selling take place discreetly. Whether colleges and universities
should do so is a further question. The idea of selling admission is open to two objections.
One is about fairness; the other is about corruption. The fairness objection says that
admitting children of wealthy donors in exchange for a handsome donation to the college
fund is unfair to applicants who lacked the good judgment to be born to affluent parents. This
objection views a college education as a source of opportunity and
access, and worries that giving an edge to children of the wealthy perpetuates social and
economic inequality.
The corruption objection is about institutional integrity. This objection points out that
higher education not only equips students for remunerative jobs; it also embodies certain
idealsthe pursuit of truth, the promotion of scholarly and scientific excellence, the
advancement of humane teaching and learning, the cultivation of civic virtue. Although all
universities need money to pursue their ends, allowing fund-raising needs to predominate
runs the risk of distorting these ends and corrupting the norms that give universities their
reason for being. That the corruption objection is about integritythe fidelity of an institution
to its constitutive idealsis suggested by the familiar charge of selling out.
TWO OBJECTIONS TO MARKETS
These two kinds of arguments reverberate through debates about what money should and
should not buy. The fairness objection asks about the inequality that market choices may
reflect; the corruption objection asks about the attitudes and norms that market relations
may damage or dissolve.
23??Consider kidneys. Its true that money can buy one without ruining its value. But should
kidneys be bought and sold? Those who say no typically object on one of two grounds: They
argue that such markets prey upon the poor, whose choice to sell their kidneys may not be
truly voluntary (the fairness argument). Or they argue that such markets promote a
degrading, objectifying view of the human person, as a collection of spare parts (the
corruption argument).
Or consider children. It would be possible to create a market in babies up for adoption. But
should we? Those who object offer two reasons: One is that putting children up for sale
would price less affluent parents out of the market, or leave them with the cheapest, least
desirable children (the fairness argument). The other is that putting a price tag on children
would corrupt the norm of unconditional parental love; the inevitable price differences would
reinforce the notion that the value of a child depends on his or her race, sex, intellectual
promise, physical abilities or disabilities, and other traits (the corruption argument).
Its worth taking a moment to clarify these two arguments for the moral limits of markets.
The fairness objection points to the injustice that can arise when people buy and sell things
under conditions of inequality or dire economic necessity. According to this objection, market
exchanges are not always as voluntary as market enthusiasts suggest. A peasant may agree to
sell his kidney or cornea to feed his starving family, but his agreement may not really be
voluntary. He may be unfairly coerced, in effect, by the necessities of his situation.
The corruption objection is different. It points to the degrading effect of market valuation
and exchange on certain goods and practices. According to this objection, certain moral and
civic goods are diminished or corrupted if bought and sold. The argument from corruption
cannot be met by establishing fair bargaining conditions. It applies under conditions of
equality and inequality alike.
59
The long-standing debate about prostitution illustrates the difference. Some people oppose
prostitution on the grounds that it is rarely, if ever, truly voluntary. They argue that those who
sell their bodies for sex are typically coerced, whether by poverty, drug addiction, or the
threat of violence. This is a version of the fairness objection. But
others object to prostitution on the grounds that it is degrading to women, whether or not
they are forced into it. According to this argument, prostitution is a form of corruption that
demeans women and promotes bad attitudes toward sex. The degradation objection doesnt
depend on tainted consent; it would condemn prostitution even in a society without poverty,
even in cases of upscale prostitutes who liked the work and freely chose it.
Each objection draws on a different moral ideal. The fairness argument draws on the ideal
of consent or, more precisely, the ideal of consent carried out under fair background
conditions. One of the main arguments for using markets to allocate goods is that markets
respect freedom of choice. They allow people to choose for themselves whether to sell this or
that good at a given price.
But the fairness objection points out that some such choices are not truly voluntary.
Market choices are not free choices if some people are desperately poor or lack the ability to
bargain on fair terms. So in order to know whether a market choice is a free choice, we have
to ask what inequalities in the background conditions of society undermine meaningful
consent. At what point do inequalities of bargaining power coerce the disadvantaged and
undermine the fairness of the deals they make?
The corruption argument points to a different set of moral ideals. It appeals not to consent
but to the moral importance of the goods at stake, the ones said to be degraded by market
valuation and exchange. So to decide whether college admission should be bought and sold,
we have to debate the moral and civic goods that colleges should pursue, and ask whether
selling admission would damage those goods. To decide whether to establish a market in
babies up for adoption, we need to ask what norms should govern the parent-child
relationship, and ask whether buying and selling children would undermine those norms.
The fairness and corruption objections differ in their implications for markets: The fairness
argument does not object to marketizing certain goods on the grounds that they are precious
or sacred or priceless; it objects to buying and selling goods against a background of
inequality severe enough to create unfair bargaining conditions. It offers no basis for
objecting to the commodification of goods (whether sex or kidneys or college admission) in a
society whose background conditions are fair.
The corruption argument, by contrast, focuses on the character of the goods themselves
and the norms that should govern them. So it cannot be met simply by establishing fair
bargaining conditions. Even in a society without unjust differences of power and wealth, there
would still be things that money should not buy. This is because markets are not mere
mechanisms; they embody certain values. And sometimes, market values crowd out
nonmarket norms worth caring about.
CROWDING OUT NONMARKET NORMS
How exactly does this crowding out take place? How do market values corrupt, dissolve, or
displace nonmarket norms? Standard economic reasoning assumes that commodifying a
goodputting it up for saledoes not alter its character. Market exchanges increase
economic efficiency without changing the goods themselves. That is why economists are
generally sympathetic to using financial incentives to elicit desirable behavior; scalping tickets
for highly prized
60
concerts, sporting events, even papal masses; employing tradable quotas to allocate
pollution, refugees, and procreation; giving cash gifts rather than presents; using markets to
ease the gap between supply and demand for all manner of goods, even kidneys. Market
exchanges make both parties better off without making anyone else worse offif you assume
that market relations and the attitudes they foster dont diminish the value of the goods
being exchanged.
But this assumption is open to doubt. Weve already considered a raft of examples that call
it into question. As markets reach into spheres of life traditionally governed by nonmarket
norms, the notion that markets dont touch or taint the goods they exchange becomes
increasingly implausible. A growing body of research confirms what common sense suggests:
financial incentives and other market mechanisms can backfire by crowding out nonmarket
norms. Sometimes, offering payment for a certain behavior gets you less of it, not more.
NUCLEAR WASTE SITES
For years, Switzerland had been trying to find a place to store radioactive nuclear waste.
Although the country relies heavily on nuclear energy, few communities wanted nuclear
waste to reside in their midst. One location designated as a potential nuclear waste site was
the small mountain village of Wolfenschiessen (pop. 2,100), in central Switzerland. In 1993,
shortly before a referendum on the issue, some economists surveyed the residents of the
village, asking whether they would vote to accept a nuclear waste repository in their
community, if the Swiss parliament decided to build it there. Although the facility was widely
viewed as an undesirable addition to the neighborhood,
a slim majority (51 percent) of residents said they would accept it. Apparently their sense of
civic duty outweighed their concern about the risks. Then the economists added a sweetener:
suppose parliament proposed building the nuclear waste facility in your community and
offered to compensate each resident with an annual monetary payment. Then would you
favor it?
24??The result: support went down, not up. Adding the financial inducement cut the rate of
acceptance in half, from 51 to 25 percent. The offer of money actually reduced peoples
willingness to host the nuclear waste site. Whats more, upping the ante didnt help. When
the economists increased the monetary offer, the result was unchanged. The residents stood
firm even when offered yearly cash payments as high as $8,700 per person, well in excess of
the median monthly income. Similar if less dramatic reactions to monetary offers have been
found in other places where local communities have resisted radioactive waste repositories.
25??So what was going on in the Swiss village? Why would more people accept nuclear
waste for free than for pay?
Standard economic analysis suggests that offering people money to accept a burden would
increase, not decrease their willingness to do so. But Bruno S. Frey and Felix Oberholzer-Gee,
the economists who led the study, point out that the price effect is sometimes confounded by
moral considerations, including a commitment to the common good. For many villagers,
willingness to accept the nuclear waste site reflected public spirita recognition that the
country as a whole depended on nuclear energy and that the nuclear waste had to be stored
somewhere. If their community was found to be the safest storage site, they were willing to
bear the burden. Against the background of this civic commitment, the offer of cash to
residents of the village felt like a bribe, an effort to buy their vote. In fact, 83 percent
of those who rejected the monetary proposal explained their opposition by saying they
could not be bribed.
61
26??You might think that adding a financial incentive would simply reinforce whatever
public-spirited sentiment already exists, thus increasing support for the nuclear waste site.
After all, arent two incentivesone financial, the other civicmore powerful than one? Not
necessarily. It is a mistake to assume that incentives are additive. To the contrary, for the
good citizens of Switzerland, the prospect of a private payoff transformed a civic question into
a pecuniary one. The intrusion of market norms crowded out their sense of civic duty.
Where public spirit prevails, the authors of the study conclude, using price incentives to
muster support for the construction of a socially desirable, but locally unwanted, facility
comes at a higher price than suggested by standard economic theory because these
incentives tend to crowd out civic duty.
27??This does not mean that government agencies should simply impose siting decisions on
local communities. High-handed regulation can be even more corrosive of public spirit than
monetary incentives. Enabling local residents to assess the risks for themselves, allowing
citizens to participate in deciding what sites best serve the public interest, giving host
communities the right to close dangerous facilities if necessarythese are surer ways of
generating public support than simply trying to buy it.
28??Although cash payoffs are generally resented, compensation in kind is often welcomed.
Communities often accept compensation for the siting of undesirable public projectsan
airport, a landfill site, a recycling stationin their own backyards. But studies have found that
people are more likely to accept such compensation if it takes the form of public goods rather
than cash. Public parks, libraries, school improvements, community centers, even jogging and
bicycle
trails are more readily accepted as compensation than are monetary payments.
29??From the standpoint of economic efficiency, this is puzzling, even irrational. Cash is
always better, supposedly, than in-kind public goods, for reasons we explored in connection
with gift giving. Money is fungible, the universal gift card: if residents are compensated in
cash, they can always decide to pool their windfall to pay for public parks, libraries, and
playgrounds, if that is what will maximize their utility. Or they can choose to spend the money
on private consumption.
But this logic misses the meaning of civic sacrifice. Public goods are more fitting than
private cash as compensation for public harms and inconveniences, because such goods
acknowledge the civic burdens and shared sacrifice that siting decisions impose. A monetary
payment to residents for accepting a new runway or landfill in their town can be seen as a
bribe to acquiesce in the degradation of the community. But a new library, playground, or
school repays the civic sacrifice in the same coin, so to speak, by strengthening the
community and honoring its public spirit.
DONATION DAY AND LATE PICKUPS
Financial incentives have also been found to crowd out public spirit in settings less fateful
than those involving nuclear waste. Each