
Also by Delia Owens
WITH MARK OWENS
Secrets of the Savanna
The Eye of the Elephant
Cry of the Kalahari

G. P. PUTNAMS SONS
Publishers Since 1838
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
Copyright  2018 by Delia Owens
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you
for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in
any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
Excerpts from The Correspondence School Instructor Says Goodbye to His Poetry Students from Three Books by Galway Kinnell. Copyright 
1993 by Galway Kinnell. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.
Evening from Above the River: The Complete Poems  1990 by Anne Wright. Published by Wesleyan University Press. Used by permission.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Owens, Delia, author.
Title: Where the crawdads sing / Delia Owens.
Description: New York : G.P. Putnams Sons, 2018.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018010775| ISBN 9780735219090 (hardback) | ISBN 9780735219113 (epub)
Subjects: | BISAC: FICTION / Literary. | FICTION / Coming of Age. | FICTION / Contemporary Women.
Classification: LCC PS3615.W447 W48 2018 | DDC 813/.6dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018010775
p. cm.
Map and illustrations by Meighan Cavanaugh
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the authors imagination or are used fictitiously, and
any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
Version_1
To Amanda, Margaret, and Barbara
Heres tod ya
If I never seed ya
I never knowed ya.
I seed ya
I knowed ya
I loved ya,
Forever.
Contents
Also by Delia Owens
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Map
PART 1 | The Marsh
Prologue
1. Ma
2. Jodie
3. Chase
4. School
5. Investigation
6. A Boat and a Boy
7. The Fishing Season
8. Negative Data
9. Jumpin
10. Just Grass in the Wind
11. Croker Sacks Full
12. Pennies and Grits
13. Feathers
14. Red Fibers
15. The Game
16. Reading
17. Crossing the Threshold
18. White Canoe
19. Something Going On
20. July 4
21. Coop
PART 2 | The Swamp
22. Same Tide
23. The Shell
24. The Fire Tower
25. A Visit from Patti Love
26. The Boat Ashore
27. Out Hog Mountain Road
28. The Shrimper
29. Seaweed
30. The Rips
31. A Book
32. Alibi
33. The Scar
34. Search the Shack
35. The Compass
36. To Trap a Fox
37. Gray Sharks
38. Sunday Justice
39. Chase by Chance
40. Cypress Cove
41. A Small Herd
42. A Cell
43. A Microscope
44. Cell Mate
45. Red Cap
46. King of the World
47. The Expert
48. A Trip
49. Disguises
50. The Journal
51. Waning Moon
52. Three Mountains Motel
53. Missing Link
54. Vice Versa
55. Grass Flowers
56. The Night Heron
57. The Firefly
Acknowledgments
About the Author

P A R T 1
The Marsh
Prologue
1969
Marsh is not swamp. Marsh is a space of light, where grass grows in water, and water
flows into the sky. Slow-moving creeks wander, carrying the orb of the sun with them to
the sea, and long-legged birds lift with unexpected graceas though not built to fly
against the roar of a thousand snow geese.
Then within the marsh, here and there, true swamp crawls into low-lying bogs, hidden
in clammy forests. Swamp water is still and dark, having swallowed the light in its muddy
throat. Even night crawlers are diurnal in this lair. There are sounds, of course, but
compared to the marsh, the swamp is quiet because decomposition is cellular work. Life
decays and reeks and returns to the rotted duff; a poignant wallow of death begetting
life. On the morning of October 30, 1969, the body of Chase Andrews lay in the swamp,
which would have absorbed it silently, routinely. Hiding it for good. A swamp knows all
about death, and doesnt necessarily define it as tragedy, certainly not a sin. But this
morning two boys from the village rode their bikes out to the old fire tower and, from the
third switchback, spotted his denim jacket.
1.
Ma
1952
The morning burned so August-hot, the marshs moist breath hung the oaks and pines
with fog. The palmetto patches stood unusually quiet except for the low, slow flap of the
herons wings lifting from the lagoon. And then, Kya, only six at the time, heard the
screen door slap. Standing on the stool, she stopped scrubbing grits from the pot and
lowered it into the basin of worn-out suds. No sounds now but her own breathing. Who
had left the shack? Not Ma. She never let the door slam.
But when Kya ran to the porch, she saw her mother in a long brown skirt, kick pleats
nipping at her ankles, as she walked down the sandy lane in high heels. The stubbynosed
shoes were fake alligator skin. Her only going-out pair. Kya wanted to holler out
but knew not to rouse Pa, so opened the door and stood on the brick-n-board steps.
From there she saw the blue train case Ma carried. Usually, with the confidence of a pup,
Kya knew her mother would return with meat wrapped in greasy brown paper or with a
chicken, head dangling down. But she never wore the gator heels, never took a case.
Ma always looked back where the foot lane met the road, one arm held high, white
palm waving, as she turned onto the track, which wove through bog forests, cattail
lagoons, and maybeif the tide obligedeventually into town. But today she walked on,
unsteady in the ruts. Her tall figure emerged now and then through the holes of the
forest until only swatches of white scarf flashed between the leaves. Kya sprinted to the
spot she knew would bare the road; surely Ma would wave from there, but she arrived
only in time to glimpse the blue casethe color so wrong for the woodsas it
disappeared. A heaviness, thick as black-cotton mud, pushed her chest as she returned to
the steps to wait.
Kya was the youngest of five, the others much older, though later she couldnt recall
their ages. They lived with Ma and Pa, squeezed together like penned rabbits, in the
rough-cut shack, its screened porch staring big-eyed from under the oaks.
Jodie, the brother closest to Kya, but still seven years older, stepped from the house
and stood behind her. He had her same dark eyes and black hair; had taught her
birdsongs, star names, how to steer the boat through saw grass.
Mall be back, he said.
I dunno. Shes wearin her gator shoes.
A ma dont leave her kids. It aint in em.
You told me that fox left her babies.
Yeah, but that vixen got er leg all tore up. Shedve starved to death if shed tried to
feed herself n her kits. She was better off to leave em, heal herself up, then whelp more
when she could raise em good. Ma aint starvin, shell be back. Jodie wasnt nearly as
sure as he sounded, but said it for Kya.
Her throat tight, she whispered, But Mas carryin that blue case like shes goin
somewheres big.
  
THE SHACK SAT BACK from the palmettos, which sprawled across sand flats to a necklace of
green lagoons and, in the distance, all the marsh beyond. Miles of blade-grass so tough it
grew in salt water, interrupted only by trees so bent they wore the shape of the wind.
Oak forests bunched around the other sides of the shack and sheltered the closest
lagoon, its surface so rich in life it churned. Salt air and gull-song drifted through the trees
from the sea.
Claiming territory hadnt changed much since the 1500s. The scattered marsh holdings
werent legally described, just staked out naturala creek boundary here, a dead oak
thereby renegades. A man doesnt set up a palmetto lean-to in a bog unless hes on the
run from somebody or at the end of his own road.
The marsh was guarded by a torn shoreline, labeled by early explorers as the
Graveyard of the Atlantic because riptides, furious winds, and shallow shoals wrecked
ships like paper hats along what would become the North Carolina coast. One seamans
journal read, rangd along the Shoar . . . but could discern no Entrance . . . A violent
Storm overtook us . . . we were forced to get off to Sea, to secure Ourselves and Ship,
and were driven by the Rapidity of a strong Current . . .
The Land . . . being marshy and Swamps, we returnd towards our Ship . . .
Discouragement of all such as should hereafter come into those Parts to settle.
Those looking for serious land moved on, and this infamous marsh became a net,
scooping up a mishmash of mutinous sailors, castaways, debtors, and fugitives dodging
wars, taxes, or laws that they didnt take to. The ones malaria didnt kill or the swamp
didnt swallow bred into a woodsmen tribe of several races and multiple cultures, each of
whom could fell a small forest with a hatchet and pack a buck for miles. Like river rats,
each had his own territory, yet had to fit into the fringe or simply disappear some day in
the swamp. Two hundred years later, they were joined by runaway slaves, who escaped
into the marsh and were called maroons, and freed slaves, penniless and beleaguered,
who dispersed into the water-land because of scant options.
Maybe it was mean country, but not an inch was lean. Layers of lifesquiggly sand
crabs, mud-waddling crayfish, waterfowl, fish, shrimp, oysters, fatted deer, and plump
geesewere piled on the land or in the water. A man who didnt mind scrabbling for
supper would never starve.
It was now 1952, so some of the claims had been held by a string of disconnected,
unrecorded persons for four centuries. Most before the Civil War. Others squatted on the
land more recently, especially after the World Wars, when men came back broke and
broke-up. The marsh did not confine them but defined them and, like any sacred ground,
kept their secrets deep. No one cared that they held the land because nobody else
wanted it. After all, it was wasteland bog.
Just like their whiskey, the marsh dwellers bootlegged their own lawsnot like those
burned onto stone tablets or inscribed on documents, but deeper ones, stamped in their
genes. Ancient and natural, like those hatched from hawks and doves. When cornered,
desperate, or isolated, man reverts to those instincts that aim straight at survival. Quick
and just. They will always be the trump cards because they are passed on more
frequently from one generation to the next than the gentler genes. It is not a morality,
but simple math. Among themselves, doves fight as often as hawks.
  
MA DIDNT COME BACK that day. No one spoke of it. Least of all Pa. Stinking of fish and drum
likker, he clanked pot lids. Whars supper?
Eyes downcast, the brothers and sisters shrugged. Pa dog-cussed, then limp-stepped
out, back into the woods. There had been fights before; Ma had even left a time or two,
but she always came back, scooping up whoever would be cuddled.
The two older sisters cooked a supper of red beans and cornbread, but no one sat to
eat at the table, as they would have with Ma. Each dipped beans from the pot, flopped
cornbread on top, and wandered off to eat on their floor mattresses or the faded sofa.
Kya couldnt eat. She sat on the porch steps, looking down the lane. Tall for her age,
bone skinny, she had deep-tanned skin and straight hair, black and thick as crow wings.
Darkness put a stop to her lookout. Croaking frogs would drown the sounds of
footsteps; even so, she lay on her porch bed, listening. Just that morning shed awakened
to fatback crackling in the iron skillet and whiffs of biscuits browning in the wood oven.
Pulling up her bib overalls, shed rushed into the kitchen to put the plates and forks out.
Pick the weevils from the grits. Most dawns, smiling wide, Ma hugged herGood
morning, my special girland the two of them moved about the chores, dancelike.
Sometimes Ma sang folk songs or quoted nursery rhymes: This little piggy went to
market. Or shed swing Kya into a jitterbug, their feet banging the plywood floor until the
music of the battery-operated radio died, sounding as if it were singing to itself at the
bottom of a barrel. Other mornings Ma spoke about adult things Kya didnt understand,
but she figured Mas words needed somewhere to go, so she absorbed them through her
skin, as she poked more wood in the cookstove. Nodding like she knew.
Then, the hustle of getting everybody up and fed. Pa not there. He had two settings:
silence and shouting. So it was just fine when he slept through, or didnt come home at
all.
But this morning, Ma had been quiet; her smile lost, her eyes red. Shed tied a white
scarf pirate style, low across her forehead, but the purple and yellow edges of a bruise
spilled out. Right after breakfast, even before the dishes were washed, Ma had put a few
personals in the train case and walked down the road.
  
THE NEXT MORNING, Kya took up her post again on the steps, her dark eyes boring down the
lane like a tunnel waiting for a train. The marsh beyond was veiled in fog so low its cushy
bottom sat right on the mud. Barefoot, Kya drummed her toes, twirled grass stems at
doodlebugs, but a six-year-old cant sit long and soon she moseyed onto the tidal flats,
sucking sounds pulling at her toes. Squatting at the edge of the clear water, she watched
minnows dart between sunspots and shadows.
Jodie hollered to her from the palmettos. She stared; maybe he was coming with
news. But as he wove through the spiky fronds, she knew by the way he moved, casual,
that Ma wasnt home.
Ya wanta play explorers? he asked.
Ya said yare too old to play splorers.
Nah, I just said that. Never too old. Race ya!
They tore across the flats, then through the woods toward the beach. She squealed as
he overtook her and laughed until they reached the large oak that jutted enormous arms
over the sand. Jodie and their older brother, Murph, had hammered a few boards across
the branches as a lookout tower and tree fort. Now, much of it was falling in, dangling
from rusty nails.
Usually if she was allowed to crew at all it was as slave girl, bringing her brothers
warm biscuits swiped from Mas pan.
But today Jodie said, You can be captain.
Kya raised her right arm in a charge. Run off the Spaniards! They broke off stickswords
and crashed through brambles, shouting and stabbing at the enemy.
Thenmake-believe coming and going easilyshe walked to a mossy log and sat.
Silently, he joined her. He wanted to say something to get her mind off Ma, but no words
came, so they watched the swimming shadows of water striders.
Kya returned to the porch steps later and waited for a long time, but, as she looked to
the end of the lane, she never cried. Her face was still, her lips a simple thin line under
searching eyes. But Ma didnt come back that day either.
2.
Jodie
1952
After Ma left, over the next few weeks, Kyas oldest brother and two sisters drifted away
too, as if by example. They had endured Pas red-faced rages, which started as shouts,
then escalated into fist-slugs, or backhanded punches, until one by one, they
disappeared. They were nearly grown anyway. And later, just as she forgot their ages,
she couldnt remember their real names, only that they were called Missy, Murph, and
Mandy. On her porch mattress, Kya found a small pile of socks left by her sisters.
On the morning when Jodie was the only sibling left, Kya awakened to the clatter-clank
and hot grease of breakfast. She dashed into the kitchen, thinking Ma was home frying
corn fritters or hoecakes. But it was Jodie, standing at the woodstove, stirring grits. She
smiled to hide the letdown, and he patted the top of her head, gently shushing her to be
quiet: if they didnt wake Pa, they could eat alone. Jodie didnt know how to make
biscuits, and there wasnt any bacon, so he cooked grits and scrambled eggs in lard, and
they sat down together, silently exchanging glances and smiles.
They washed their dishes fast, then ran out the door toward the marsh, he in the lead.
But just then Pa shouted and hobbled toward them. Impossibly lean, his frame seemed to
flop about from poor gravity. His molars yellow as an old dogs teeth.
Kya looked up at Jodie. We can run. Hide in the mossy place.
Its okay. Itll be okay, he said.
  
LATER, NEAR SUNSET, Jodie found Kya on the beach staring at the sea. As he stepped up
beside her, she didnt look at him but kept her eyes on the roiling waves. Still, she knew
by the way he spoke that Pa had slugged his face.
I hafta go, Kya. Cant live here no longer.
She almost turned to him, but didnt. Wanted to beg him not to leave her alone with
Pa, but the words jammed up.
When youre old enough youll understand, he said. Kya wanted to holler out that she
may be young, but she wasnt stupid. She knew Pa was the reason they all left; what she
wondered was why no one took her with them. Shed thought of leaving too, but had
nowhere to go and no bus money.
Kya, ya be careful, hear. If anybody comes, dont go in the house. They can get ya
there. Run deep in the marsh, hide in the bushes. Always cover yo tracks; I learned ya
how. And ya can hide from Pa, too. When she still didnt speak, he said good-bye and
strode across the beach to the woods. Just before he stepped into the trees, she finally
turned and watched him walk away.
This little piggy stayed home, she said to the waves.
Breaking her freeze, she ran to the shack. Shouted his name down the hall, but Jodies
things were already gone, his floor bed stripped bare.
She sank onto his mattress, watching the last of that day slide down the wall. Light
lingered after the sun, as it does, some of it pooling in the room, so that for a brief
moment the lumpy beds and piles of old clothes took on more shape and color than the
trees outside.
A gnawing hungersuch a mundane thingsurprised her. She walked to the kitchen
and stood at the door. All her life the room had been warmed from baking bread, boiling
butter beans, or bubbling fish stew. Now, it was stale, quiet, and dark. Whos gonna
cook? she asked out loud. Could have asked, Whos gonna dance?
She lit a candle and poked at hot ashes in the woodstove, added kindling. Pumped the
bellows till a flame caught, then more wood. The Frigidaire served as a cupboard because
no electricity came near the shack. To keep the mold at bay, the door was propped open
with the flyswatter. Still, greenish-black veins of mildew grew in every crevice.
Getting out leftovers, she said, Ill tump the grits in lard, warm em up, which she did
and ate from the pot, looking through the window for Pa. But he didnt come.
When light from the quarter moon finally touched the shack, she crawled into her
porch beda lumpy mattress on the floor with real sheets covered in little blue roses that
Ma had got at a yard salealone at night for the first time in her life.
At first, every few minutes, she sat up and peered through the screen. Listening for
footsteps in the woods. She knew the shapes of all the trees; still some seemed to dart
here and there, moving with the moon. For a while she was so stiff she couldnt swallow,
but on cue, the familiar songs of tree frogs and katydids filled the night. More comforting
than three blind mice with a carving knife. The darkness held an odor of sweetness, the
earthy breath of frogs and salamanders whod made it through one more stinky-hot day.
The marsh snuggled in closer with a low fog, and she slept.
  
FOR THREE DAYS Pa didnt come and Kya boiled turnip greens from Mas garden for
breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Shed walked out to the chicken coop for eggs but found it
bare. Not a chicken or egg anywhere.
Chicken shits! Youre just a bunch of chicken shits! Shed been meaning to tend them
since Ma left but hadnt done much of anything. Now theyd escaped as a motley flock,
clucking far in the trees beyond. Shed have to scatter grits, see if she could keep them
close.
On the evening of the fourth day, Pa showed up with a bottle and sprawled across his
bed. Walking into the kitchen the next morning, he hollered, Whars evbody got to?
I dont know, she said, not looking at him.
Ya dont know much as a cur-dawg. Useless as tits on a boar hog.
Kya slipped quietly out the porch door, but walking along the beach searching for
mussels, she smelled smoke and looked up to see a plume rising from the direction of the
shack. Running as fast as she could, she broke through the trees and saw a bonfire
blazing in the yard. Pa was throwing Mas paintings, dresses, and books onto the flames.
No! Kya screamed. He didnt look at her, but threw the old battery-operated radio
into the fire. Her face and arms burned as she reached toward the paintings, but the heat
pushed her back.
She rushed to the shack to block Pas return for more, locking eyes with him. Pa raised
his backhand toward Kya, but she stood her ground. Suddenly, he turned and limpstepped
toward his boat.
Kya sank onto the brick n boards, watching Mas watercolors of the marsh smolder
into ash. She sat until the sun set, until all the buttons glowed as embers and the
memories of dancing the jitterbug with Ma melted into the flames.
Over the next few days, Kya learned from the mistakes of the others, and perhaps
more from the minnows, how to live with him. Just keep out of the way, dont let him see
you, dart from sunspots to shadows. Up and out of the house before he rose, she lived in
the woods and water, then padded into the house to sleep in her bed on the porch as
close to the marsh as she could get.
  
PA HAD FOUGHT GERMANY in the Second World War, where his left femur caught shrapnel and
shattered, their last source of pride. His weekly disability checks, their only source of
income. A week after Jodie left, the Frigidaire stood empty and hardly any turnips
remained. When Kya walked into the kitchen that Monday morning, Pa pointed to a
crumpled dollar and loose coins on the kitchen table.
This herell get ya food fer the week. Thar aint no such thang as handouts, he said.
Everthang cost sumpm, and fer the money ya gotta keep the house up, stove wood
clected, and warsh the laundree.
For the first time ever Kya walked alone toward the village of Barkley Cove to buy
groceriesthis little piggy went to market. She plodded through deep sand or black mud
for four miles until the bay glistened ahead, the hamlet on its shore.
Everglades surrounded the town, mixing their salty haze with that of the ocean, which
swelled in high tide on the other side of Main Street. Together the marsh and sea
separated the village from the rest of the world, the only connection being the single-lane
highway that limped into town on cracked cement and potholes.
There were two streets: Main ran along the oceanfront with a row of shops; the Piggly
Wiggly grocery at one end, the Western Auto at the other, the diner in the middle. Mixed
in there were Kresss Five and Dime, a Penneys (catalog only), Parkers Bakery, and a
Buster Brown Shoe Shop. Next to the Piggly was the Dog-Gone Beer Hall, which offered
roasted hot dogs, red-hot chili, and fried shrimp served in folded paper boats. No ladies or
children stepped inside because it wasnt considered proper, but a take-out window had
been cut out of the wall so they could order hot dogs and Nehi cola from the street.
Coloreds couldnt use the door or the window.
The other street, Broad, ran from the old highway straight toward the ocean and into
Main, ending right there. So the only intersection in town was Main, Broad, and the
Atlantic Ocean. The stores and businesses werent joined together as in most towns but
were separated by small, vacant lots brushed with sea oats and palmettos, as if overnight
the marsh had inched in. For more than two hundred years, sharp salty winds had
weathered the cedar-shingled buildings to the color of rust, and the window frames, most
painted white or blue, had flaked and cracked. Mostly, the village seemed tired of arguing
with the elements, and simply sagged.
The town wharf, draped in frayed ropes and old pelicans, jutted into the small bay,
whose water, when calm, reflected the reds and yellows of shrimp boats. Dirt roads, lined
with small cedar houses, wound through the trees, around lagoons, and along the ocean
on either end of the shops. Barkley Cove was quite literally a backwater town, bits
scattered here and there among the estuaries and reeds like an egrets nest flung by the
wind.
Barefoot and dressed in too-short bib overalls, Kya stood where the marsh track met
the road. Biting her lip, wanting to run home. She couldnt reckon what shed say to
people; how shed figure the grocery money. But hunger was a pushing thing, so she
stepped onto Main and walked, head down, toward the Piggly Wiggly on a crumbling
sidewalk that appeared now and then between grass clumps. As she approached the Five
and Dime, she heard a commotion behind her and jumped to the side just as three boys,
a few years older than she, sped by on bikes. The lead boy looked back at her, laughing
at the near miss, and then almost collided with a woman stepping from the store.
CHASE ANDREWS, you get back here! All three of you boys. They pedaled a few
more yards, then thought better of it and returned to the woman, Miss Pansy Price,
saleslady in fabric and notions. Her family had once owned the largest farm on the
outskirts of the marsh and, although they were forced to sell out long ago, she continued
her role as genteel landowner. Which wasnt easy living in a tiny apartment above the
diner. Miss Pansy usually wore hats shaped like silk turbans, and this morning her
headwear was pink, setting off red lipstick and splotches of rouge.
She scolded the boys. Ive a mind to tell yalls mamas about this. Or better, yo
papas. Ridin fast like that on the sidewalk, nearly runnin me over. What ya got to say for
yoself, Chase?
He had the sleekest bikered seat and chrome handlebars, raised up. Were sorry,
Miss Pansy, we didnt see ya cause that girl over yonder got in the way. Chase, tanned
with dark hair, pointed at Kya, who had stepped back and stood half inside a myrtle
shrub.
Never mind her. You caint go blamin yo sins on somebody else, not even swamp
trash. Now, you boys gotta do a good deed, make up fer this. There goes Miss Arial with
her groceries, go help carry em to her truck. And put yo shirttails in.
Yes, maam, the boys said as they biked toward Miss Arial, who had taught them all
second grade.
Kya knew that the parents of the dark-haired boy owned the Western Auto store,
which was why he rode the snazziest bike. Shed seen him unloading big cardboard boxes
of merchandise from the truck, packing it in, but she had never spoken a word to him or
the others.
She waited a few minutes, then, head low again, walked toward the grocery. Inside
the Piggly Wiggly, Kya studied the selection of grits and chose a one-pound bag of coarse
ground yellow because a red tag hung from the topa special of the week. Like Ma
taught her. She fretted in the aisle until no other customers stood at the register, then
walked up and faced the checkout lady, Mrs. Singletary, who asked, Wheres ya mama
at? Mrs. Singletarys hair was cut short, curled tight, and colored purple as an iris in
sunlight.
Doin chores, maam.
Well, ya got money for the grits, or dont ya?
Yesm. Not knowing how to count the exact amount, she laid down the whole dollar.
Mrs. Singletary wondered if the child knew the difference in the coins, so as she placed
the change into Kyas open palm she counted slowly, Twenty-five, fifty, sixty, seventy,
eighty, eighty-five and three pennies. Cause the grits cost twelve cents.
Kya felt sick to her stomach. Was she supposed to count something back? She stared
to the puzzle of coins in her palm.
Mrs. Singletary seemed to soften. Okay, then. Git on with ya.
Kya dashed from the store and walked as fast as she could toward the marsh track.
Plenty of times, Ma had told her, Never run in town or peoplell think you stole
something. But as soon as Kya reached the sandy track, she ran a good half mile. Then
speed-walked the rest.
Back home, thinking she knew how to fix grits, she threw them into boiling water like
Ma had done, but they lumped up all together in one big ball that burned on the bottom
and stayed raw in the middle. So rubbery she could only eat a few bites, so she searched
the garden again and found a few more turnip greens between the goldenrod. Then
boiled them up and ate them all, slurping down the pot likker.
In a few days she got the hang of fixing grits, although no matter how hard she stirred,
they lumped up some. The next week she bought backbonesmarked with a red tag
and boiled them with grits and collard greens in a mush that tasted fine.
Kya had done the laundry plenty with Ma, so knew how to scrub clothes on the rub
board under the yard spigot with bars of lye soap. Pas overalls were so heavy wet she
couldnt wring them out with her tiny hands, and couldnt reach the line to hang them, so
draped them sopping over the palmetto fronds at the edge of the woods.
She and Pa did this two-step, living apart in the same shack, sometimes not seeing
each other for days. Almost never speaking. She tidied up after herself and after him, like
a serious little woman. She wasnt near enough of a cook to fix meals for himhe usually
wasnt there anywaybut she made his bed, picked up, swept up, and washed the dishes
most of the time. Not because shed been told, but because it was the only way to keep
the shack decent for Mas return.
  
MA HAD ALWAYS SAID the autumn moon showed up for Kyas birthday. So even though she
couldnt remember the date of her birth, one evening when the moon rose swollen and
golden from the lagoon, Kya said to herself, I reckon Im seven. Pa never mentioned it;
certainly there was no cake. He didnt say anything about her going to school either, and
she, not knowing much about it, was too afraid to bring it up.
Surely Ma would come back for her birthday, so the morning after the harvest moon
she put on the calico dress and stared down the lane. Kya willed Ma to be walking toward
the shack, still in her alligator shoes and long skirt. When no one came, she got the pot of
grits and walked through the woods to the seashore. Hands to her mouth, she held her
head back and called, Kee-ow, kee-ow, kee-ow. Specks of silver appeared in the sky
from up and down the beach, from over the surf.
Here they come. I cant count as high as that many gulls are, she said.
Crying and screeching, the birds swirled and dived, hovered near her face, and landed
as she tossed grits to them. Finally, they quieted and stood about preening, and she sat
on the sand, her legs folded to the side. One large gull settled onto the sand near Kya.
Its my birthday, she told the bird.
3.
Chase
1969
The rotted legs of the old abandoned fire tower straddled the bog, which created its own
tendrils of mist. Except for cawing crows, the hushed forest seemed to hold an expectant
mood as the two boys, Benji Mason and Steve Long, both ten, both blond, started up the
damp staircase on the morning of October 30, 1969.
Fall aint sposed to be this hot, Steve called back to Benji.
Yeah, and everythang quiet cept the crows.
Glancing down between the steps, Steve said, Whoa. Whats that?
Where?
See, there. Blue clothes, like somebodys lyin in the mud.
Benji called out, Hey, you! Whatchadoin?
I see a face, but it aint movin.
Arms pumping, they ran back to the ground and pushed their way to the other side of
the towers base, greenish mud clinging to their boots. There lay a man, flat on his back,
his left leg turned grotesquely forward from the knee. His eyes and mouth wide open.
Jesus Christ! Benji said.
My God, its Chase Andrews.
We better git the sheriff.
But we aint sposed to be out here.
That dont matter now. And them crowsll be snooping round anytime now.
They swung their heads toward the cawing, as Steve said, Maybe one of us oughta
stay, keep them birds off him.
Yare crazy if you think Im gonna stick round here by maself. And Im bettin a Injunhead
you wont either.
With that, they grabbed their bikes, pedaled hard down the syrupy sand track back to
Main, through town, and ran inside the low-slung building where Sheriff Ed Jackson sat at
his desk in an office lit with single lightbulbs dangling on cords. Hefty and of medium
height, he had reddish hair, his face and arms splotched with pale freckles, and sat
thumbing through a Sports Afield.
Without knocking, the boys rushed through the open door.
Sheriff . . .
Hey, Steve, Benji. You boys been to a fire?
We seen Chase Andrews flat out in the swamp under the fire tower. He looks dead.
Aint movin one bit.
Ever since Barkley Cove had been settled in 1751, no lawman extended his jurisdiction
beyond the saw grass. In the 1940s and 50s, a few sheriffs set hounds on some mainland
convicts whod escaped into the marsh, and the office still kept dogs just in case. But
Jackson mostly ignored crimes committed in the swamp. Why interrupt rats killing rats?
But this was Chase. The sheriff stood and took his hat from the rack. Show me.
Limbs of oak and wild holly screeched against the patrol truck as the sheriff
maneuvered down the sandy track with Dr. Vern Murphy, lean and fit with graying hair,
the towns only physician, sitting beside him. Each man swayed to the tune of the deep
ruts, Verns head almost banging against the window. Old friends about the same age,
they fished together some and were often thrown onto the same case. Both silent now at
the prospect of confirming whose body lay in the bog.
Steve and Benji sat in the truck bed with their bikes until the truck stopped.
Hes over there, Mr. Jackson. Behind them bushes.
Ed stepped from the truck. You boys wait here. Then he and Dr. Murphy waded the
mud to where Chase lay. The crows had flown off when the truck came, but other birds
and insects whirred above. Insolent life thrumming on.
Its Chase, all right. Sam and Patti Love wont survive this. The Andrewses had
ordered every spark plug, balanced every account, strung every price tag at the Western
Auto for their only child, Chase.
Squatting next to the body, listening for a heartbeat with his stethoscope, Vern
declared him dead.
How long ya reckon? Ed asked.
Id say at least ten hours. The coronerll know for sure.
He mustve climbed up last night, then. Fell from the top.
Vern examined Chase briefly without moving him, then stood next to Ed. Both men
stared at Chases eyes, still looking skyward from his bloated face, then glanced at his
gaping mouth.
How many times Ive told folks in this town something like this was bound to happen,
the sheriff said.
They had known Chase since he was born. Had watched his life ease from charming
child to cute teen; star quarterback and town hot shot to working for his parents. Finally,
handsome man wedding the prettiest girl. Now, he sprawled alone, less dignified than the
slough. Deaths crude pluck, as always, stealing the show.
Ed broke the silence. Thing is, I cant figure why the others didnt run for help. They
always come up here in a pack, or at least a couple of em, to make out. The sheriff and
doctor exchanged brief but knowing nods that even though he was married, Chase might
bring another woman to the tower. Lets step back out of here. Get a good look at
things, Ed said, as he lifted his feet, stepping higher than necessary. You boys stay
where you are; dont go making any more tracks.
Pointing to some footprints that led from the staircase, across the bog, to within eight
feet of Chase, Ed asked them, These your prints from this morning?
Yessir, thats as far as we went, Benji said. Soon as we seen it was Chase, we
backed up. You can see there where we backed up.
Okay. Ed turned. Vern, somethings not right. Theres no footprints near the body. If
he was with his friends or whoever, once he fell, they wouldve run down here and
stepped all around him, knelt next to him. To see if he was alive. Look how deep our
tracks are in this mud, but therere no other fresh tracks. None going toward the stairs or
away from the stairs, none around the body.
Maybe he was by himself, then. That would explain everything.
Well, Ill tell you one thing that doesnt explain. Wherere his footprints? How did
Chase Andrews walk down the path, cross this muck to the stairs so he could climb to the
top, and not leave any footprints himself?
4.
School
1952
A few days after her birthday, out alone barefooting in mud, Kya bent over, watching a
tadpole getting its frog legs. Suddenly she stood. A car churned through deep sand near
the end of their lane. No one ever drove here. Then the murmur of people talkinga man
and a womandrifted through the trees. Kya ran fast to the brush, where she could see
who was coming but still have ways to escape. Like Jodie taught her.
A tall woman emerged from the car, unsteadily maneuvering in high heels just like Ma
had done along the sandy lane. They must be the orphanage people come to get her.
I can outrun her for sure. Shed fall nose-first in them shoes. Kya stayed put and
watched the woman step to the porchs screen door.
Yoo-hoo, anybody home? Truant officer here. Ive come to take Catherine Clark to
school.
Now this was something. Kya sat mute. She was pretty sure she was supposed to go
to school at six. Here they were, a year late.
She had no notion how to talk to kids, certainly not to a teacher, but she wanted to
learn to read and what came after twenty-nine.
Catherine, dear, if ya can hear me, please come on out. Its the law, hon; ya gotta go
to school. But sides that, youll like it, dear. Ya get a hot lunch every day for free. I think
today theyre havin chicken pie with crust.
That was something else. Kya was very hungry. For breakfast shed boiled grits with
soda crackers stirred in because she didnt have any salt. One thing she already knew
about life: you cant eat grits without salt. Shed eaten chicken pie only a few times in her
life, but she could still see that golden crust, crunchy on the outside, soft inside. She
could feel that full gravy taste, like it was round. It was her stomach acting on its own
that made Kya stand up among the palmetto fronds.
Hello, dear, Im Mrs. Culpepper. Youre all grown up and ready to go to school, arent
ya?
Yesm, Kya said, head low.
Its okay, you can go barefoot, other chillin do, but cause youre a lil girl, you have to
wear a skirt. Do you have a dress or a skirt, hon?
Yesm.
Okay then, lets go get ya dressed up.
Mrs. Culpepper followed Kya through the porch door, having to step over a row of bird
nests Kya had lined up along the boards. In the bedroom Kya put on the only dress that
fit, a plaid jumper with one shoulder strap held up with a safety pin.
Thats fine, dear, you look just fine.
Mrs. Culpepper held out her hand. Kya stared at it. She hadnt touched another person
in weeks, hadnt touched a stranger her whole life. But she put her small hand in Mrs.
Culpeppers and was led down the path to the Ford Crestliner driven by a silent man
wearing a gray fedora. Sitting in the backseat, Kya didnt smile and didnt feel like a chick
tucked under its mothers wing.
Barkley Cove had one school for whites. First grade through twelfth went to a brick
two-story at the opposite end of Main from the sheriffs office. The black kids had their
own school, a one-story cement block structure out near Colored Town.
When she was led into the school office, they found her name but no date of birth in
the county birth records, so they put her in the second grade, even though shed never
been to school a day in her life. Anyhow, they said, the first grade was too crowded, and
what difference would it make to marsh people whod do a few months of school, maybe,
then never be seen again. As the principal walked her down a wide hallway that echoed
their footsteps, sweat popped out on her brow. He opened the door to a classroom and
gave her a little push.
Plaid shirts, full skirts, shoes, lots of shoes, some bare feet, and eyesall staring.
Shed never seen so many people. Maybe a dozen. The teacher, the same Mrs. Arial those
boys had helped, walked Kya to a desk near the back. She could put her things in the
cubbyhole, she was told, but Kya didnt have any things.
The teacher walked back to the front and said, Catherine, please stand and tell the
class your full name.
Her stomach churned.
Come now, dear, dont be shy.
Kya stood. Miss Catherine Danielle Clark, she said, because that was what Ma once
said was her whole name.
Can you spell dog for us?
Staring at the floor, Kya stood silent. Jodie and Ma had taught her some letters. But
shed never spelled a word aloud for anybody.
Nerves stirred in her stomach; still, she tried. G-o-d.
Laughter let loose up and down the rows.
Shh! Hush, yall! Mrs. Arial called out. We never laugh, ya hear me, we never laugh
at each other. Yall know bettern that.
Kya sat down fast in her seat at the back of the room, trying to disappear like a bark
beetle blending into the furrowed trunk of an oak. Yet nervous as she was, as the teacher
continued the lesson, she leaned forward, waiting to learn what came after twenty-nine.
So far all Miss Arial had talked about was something called phonics, and the students,
their mouths shaped like Os, echoed her sounds of ah, aa, o, and u, all of them moaning
like doves.
About eleven oclock the warm-buttery smell of baking yeast rolls and pie pastry filled
the halls and seeped into the room. Kyas stomach panged and fitted, and when the class
finally formed a single file and marched into the cafeteria, her mouth was full of saliva.
Copying the others, she picked up a tray, a green plastic plate, and flatware. A large
window with a counter opened into the kitchen, and laid out before her was an enormous
enamel pan of chicken pie crisscrossed with thick, crispy pastry, hot gravy bubbling up. A
tall black woman, smiling and calling some of the kids by name, plopped a big helping of
pie on her plate, then some pink-lady peas in butter and a yeast roll. She got banana
pudding and her own small red-and-white carton of milk to put on her tray.
She turned into the seating area, where most of the tables were full of kids laughing
and talking. She recognized Chase Andrews and his friends, who had nearly knocked her
off the sidewalk with their bikes, so she turned her head away and sat at an empty table.
Several times in quick succession, her eyes betrayed her and glanced at the boys, the
only faces she knew. But they, like everyone else, ignored her.
Kya stared at the pie full of chicken, carrots, potatoes, and little peas. Golden brown
pastry on top. Several girls, dressed in full skirts fluffed out wide with layers of crinolines,
approached. One was tall, skinny, and blond, another round with chubby cheeks. Kya
wondered how they could climb a tree or even get in a boat wearing those big skirts.
Certainly couldnt wade for frogs; wouldnt even be able to see their own feet.
As they neared, Kya stared at her plate. What would she say if they sat next to her?
But the girls passed her by, chirping like birds, and joined their friends at another table.
For all the hunger in her stomach, she found her mouth had gone dry, making it difficult
to swallow. So after eating only a few bites, she drank all the milk, stuffed as much pie as
she could into the milk carton, carefully so nobody would see her do it, and wrapped it
and the roll in her napkin.
The rest of the day, she never opened her mouth. Even when the teacher asked her a
question, she sat mute. She reckoned she was supposed to learn from them, not them
from her. Why put maself up for being laughed at? she thought.
At the last bell, she was told the bus would drop her three miles from her lane because
the road was too sandy from there, and that she had to walk to the bus every morning.
On the way home, as the bus swayed in deep ruts and passed stretches of cord grass, a
chant rose from the front: MISS Catherine Danielle Clark! Tallskinnyblonde and
Roundchubbycheeks, the girls at lunch, called out, Where ya been, marsh hen? Wheres
yo hat, swamp rat?
The bus finally stopped at an unmarked intersection of tangled tracks way back in the
woods. The driver cranked the door open, and Kya scooted out and ran for nearly half a
mile, heaved for breath, then jogged all the way to their lane. She didnt stop at the
shack but ran full out through the palmettos to the lagoon and down the trail that led
through dense, sheltering oaks to the ocean. She broke out onto the barren beach, the
sea opening its arms wide, the wind tearing loose her braided hair as she stopped at the
tide line. She was as near to tears as she had been the whole day.
Above the roar of pounding waves, Kya called to the birds. The ocean sang bass, the
gulls sang soprano. Shrieking and crying, they circled over the marsh and above the sand
as she threw piecrust and yeast rolls onto the beach. Legs hanging down, heads twisting,
they landed.
A few birds pecked gently between her toes, and she laughed from the tickling until
tears streamed down her cheeks, and finally great, ragged sobs erupted from that tight
place below her throat. When the carton was empty she didnt think she could stand the
pain, so afraid they would leave her like everybody else. But the gulls squatted on the
beach around her and went about their business of preening their gray extended wings.
So she sat down too and wished she could gather them up and take them with her to the
porch to sleep. She imagined them all packed in her bed, a fluffy bunch of warm,
feathered bodies under the covers together.
Two days later she heard the Ford Crestliner churning in the sand and ran into the
marsh, stepping heavily across sandbars, leaving footprints as plain as day, then tiptoeing
into the water, leaving no tracks, doubling back, and taking off in a different direction.
When she got to mud, she ran in circles, creating a confusion of clues. Then, when she
reached hard ground, she whispered across it, jumping from grass clump to sticks, leaving
no trace.
They came every two or three days for a few more weeks, the man in the fedora doing
the search and chase, but he never even got close. Then one week no one came. There
was only the cawing of crows. She dropped her hands to her sides, staring at the empty
lane.
Kya never went back to school a day in her life. She returned to heron watching and
shell collecting, where she reckoned she could learn something. I can already coo like a
dove, she told herself. And lots better than them. Even with all them fine shoes.
  
ONE MORNING, a few weeks after her day at school, the sun glared white-hot as Kya
climbed into her brothers tree fort at the beach and searched for sailing ships hung with
skull-and-crossbones flags. Proving that imagination grows in the loneliest of soils, she
shouted, Ho! Pirates ho! Brandishing her sword, she jumped from the tree to attack.
Suddenly pain shot through her right foot, racing like fire up her leg. Knees caving in, she
fell on her side and shrieked. She saw a long rusty nail sticking deep in the bottom of her
foot. Pa! she screamed. She tried to remember if he had come home last night. HELP
me, Pa, she cried out, but there was no answer. In one fast move, she reached down
and yanked the nail out, screaming to cover the pain.
She moved her arms through the sand in nonsensical motions, whimpering. Finally, she
sat up and looked at the bottom of her foot. There was almost no blood, just the tiny
opening of a small, deep wound. Right then she remembered the lockjaw. Her stomach
went tight and she felt cold. Jodie had told her about a boy who stepped on a rusty nail
and didnt get a tetanus shot. His jaws jammed shut, clenched so tight he couldnt open
his mouth. Then his spine cramped backward like a bow, but there was nothing anybody
could do but stand there and watch him die from the contortions.
Jodie was very clear on one point: you had to get the shot within two days after
stepping on a nail, or you were doomed. Kya had no idea how to get one of those shots.
I gotta do sumpm. Ill lock up for sure waitin for Pa. Sweat rolling down her face in
beads, she hobbled across the beach, finally entering the cooler oaks around the shack.
Ma used to soak wounds in salt water and pack them with mud mixed with all kinds of
potions. There was no salt in the kitchen, so Kya limped into the woods toward a brackish
slipstream so salty at low tide, its edges glistened with brilliant white crystals. She sat on
the ground, soaking her foot in the marshs brine, all the while moving her mouth: open,
close, open, close, mocking yawns, chewing motions, anything to keep it from jamming
up. After nearly an hour, the tide receded enough for her to dig a hole in the black mud
with her fingers, and she eased her foot gently into the silky earth. The air was cool here,
and eagle cries gave her bearing.
By late afternoon she was very hungry, so went back to the shack. Pas room was still
empty, and he probably wouldnt be home for hours. Playing poker and drinking whiskey
kept a man busy most of the night. There were no grits, but rummaging around, she
found an old greasy tin of Crisco shortening, dipped up a tiny bit of the white fat, and
spread it on a soda cracker. Nibbled at first, then ate five more.
She eased into her porch bed, listening for Pas boat. The approaching night tore and
darted and sleep came in bits, but she must have dropped off near morning for she woke
with the sun fully on her face. Quickly she opened her mouth; it still worked. She shuffled
back and forth from the brackish pool to the shack until, by tracking the sun, she knew
two days had passed. She opened and closed her mouth. Maybe she had made it.
That night, tucking herself into the sheets of the floor mattress, her mud-caked foot
wrapped in a rag, she wondered if she would wake up dead. No, she remembered, it
wouldnt be that easy: her back would bow; her limbs twist.
A few minutes later, she felt a twinge in her lower back and sat up. Oh no, oh no. Ma,
Ma. The sensation in her back repeated itself and made her hush. Its just an itch, she
muttered. Finally, truly exhausted, she slept, not opening her eyes until doves murmured
in the oak.
She walked to the pool twice a day for a week, living on saltines and Crisco, and Pa
never came home the whole time. By the eighth day she could circle her foot without
stiffness and the pain had retreated to the surface. She danced a little jig, favoring her
foot, squealing, I did it, I did it!
The next morning, she headed for the beach to find more pirates.
First thing Im gonna do is boss my crew to pick up all them nails.
  
EVERY MORNING SHE WOKE EARLY, still listening for the clatter of Mas busy cooking. Mas
favorite breakfast had been scrambled eggs from her own hens, ripe red tomatoes sliced,
and cornbread fritters made by pouring a mixture of cornmeal, water, and salt onto
grease so hot the concoction bubbled up, the edges frying into crispy lace. Ma said you
werent really frying something unless you could hear it crackling from the next room, and
all her life Kya had heard those fritters popping in grease when she woke. Smelled the
blue, hot-corn smoke. But now the kitchen was silent, cold, and Kya slipped from her
porch bed and stole to the lagoon.
Months passed, winter easing gently into place, as southern winters do. The sun, warm
as a blanket, wrapped Kyas shoulders, coaxing her deeper into the marsh. Sometimes
she heard night-sounds she didnt know or jumped from lightning too close, but whenever
she stumbled, it was the land that caught her. Until at last, at some unclaimed moment,
the heart-pain seeped away like water into sand. Still there, but deep. Kya laid her hand
upon the breathing, wet earth, and the marsh became her mother.
5.
Investigation
1969
Overhead, cicadas squealed against a mean sun. All other life-forms cowered from the
heat, emitting only a vacant hum from the undergrowth.
Wiping his brow, Sheriff Jackson said, Vern, theres more to do here, but it doesnt feel
right. Chases wife and folks dont know hes passed.
Ill go tell them, Ed, Dr. Vern Murphy replied.
I appreciate that. Take my truck. Send the ambulance back for Chase, and Joe with
my truck. But dont speak a word about this to anybody else. I dont want everybody in
this town out here, and thats just whatll happen if you mention it.
Before moving, Vern stared for a long minute at Chase, as though he had overlooked
something. As a doctor, he should fix this. Heavy swamp air stood behind them, waiting
patiently for its turn.
Ed turned to the boys. Yall stay right here. I dont need anybody yapping about this in
town, and dont put your hands on anything or make any more tracks in the mud.
Yessir, Benji said. Ya think somebody killed Chase, dont ya? Cause theres no
footprints. Pushed him off, maybe?
I didnt say any such thing. This is standard police work. Now, you boys just keep out
of the way and dont repeat anything you hear out here.
Deputy Joe Purdue, a small man with thick sideburns, showed up in the patrol truck in
less than fifteen minutes.
Just cant take it in. Chase dead. He was the best quarterback this town ever saw.
This is plumb outta kilter.
You got that right. Well, lets get to work.
What ya got so far?
Ed moved farther from the boys. Well, obviously, on the surface, it looks like an
accident: he fell from the tower and was killed. But so far I havent found any of his
footprints walking toward the steps or prints from anybody else either. Lets see if we can
find any evidence that somebody covered em up.
The two lawmen combed the area for a full ten minutes. Youre right, not one print
cept for the boys, Joe said.
Yeah, and no signs of somebody brushing them out. I just dont get it. Lets move on.
Ill work on this later, Ed said.
They took pictures of the body, of its position relative to the steps, close-ups of head
wounds, the leg bent wrong. Joe made notes as Ed dictated. As they measured the
distance from the body to the trail, they heard the sides of the ambulance scratching the
thick bushes along the lane. The driver, an old black man whod taken the wounded, ill,
dying, and dead under his charge for decades, bowed his head in respect and whispered
suggestions: Aright den, hisn arms aint gwine tuck in much, so caint roll im onta the
gunny; hafta lift im and hes gwine be heavy; Sheriff, sir, ya cradle Mr. Chases head.
Dats good. My, my. By late morning, theyd loaded him, complete with clinging sludge,
into the back.
Since Dr. Murphy had by now informed Chases parents of his death, Ed told the boys
they could go on home, and he and Joe started up the stairs, which switched to the top,
narrowing at each level. As they climbed, the round corners of the world moved out
farther and farther, the lush, rounded forests and watery marsh expanding to the very
rims.
When they reached the last step, Jackson lifted his hands and pushed open an iron
grate. After they climbed onto the platform, he eased it down again because it was part
of the floor. Wooden planks, splintered and grayed with age, formed the center of the
platform, but around the perimeter, the floor was a series of see-through square grates
that could be opened and closed. As long as they were down you could walk on them
safely, but if one was left open, you could fall to the earth sixty feet below.
Hey, look at that. Ed pointed to the far side of the platform, where one of the grates
stood open.
What the hell? Joe said as they walked to it. Peering down, they saw the perfect
outline of Chases misshapen form embedded in the mud. Yellowish goo and duckweed
had splashed to the sides like a splatter painting.
This doesnt figure, Ed said. Sometimes folks forget to close the grate over the
stairs. You know, on their way back down. Weve found it open a few times, but the
others are almost never left open.
Why would Chase open this one in the first place? Why would anybody?
Unless somebody planned to push somebody else to their death, Ed said.
Then why didnt they close it afterward?
Because if Chase had fallen through on his own, he couldnt have closed it. Had to be
left open to look like an accident.
Look at that support beam below the hole. Its all bashed in and splintered.
Yeah, I see. Chase mustve banged his head on it when he fell.
Ill climb out there, look for blood or hair samples. Collect some splinters.
Thanks, Joe. And take some close-ups. Ill go get a rope to spot you. We dont need
two bodies in this muck in one day. And we have to take fingerprints off this grate, the
grate by the stairs, the railing, the banisters. Everything anybody wouldve touched. And
collect any hair samples, threads.
  
MORE THAN TWO HOURS LATER, they stretched their backs from the leaning and stooping. Ed
said, Im not saying there was foul play. Way too early. But besides that, I cant think of
anyone whod want to kill Chase.
Well, Id say thered be quite a list, the deputy said.
Like who? Whatre you talking about?
Cmon, Ed. Ya know how Chase was. Tom-cattin, ruttin round like a penned bull let
out. Fore he was married, after he was married, with single girls, married women. I seen
randy dogs at a bitch fest better behaved.
Cmon, he wasnt that bad. Sure. He had a reputation as a ladies man. But I dont see
anybody in this town committin murder over it.
Im just sayin theres people didnt like him. Some jealous husband. Itd have to be
somebody he knew. Somebody we all know. Not likely Chased climb up here with some
stranger, Joe said.
Unless he was up to his navel in debt with some out-of-towner. Something like that
we didnt know about. And a man strong enough to push Chase Andrews. No small task.
Joe said, I can already think of a few guys up to it.
6.
A Boat and a Boy
1952
One morning, Pa, shaved fresh and dressed in a wrinkled button-down shirt, came into
the kitchen and said he was leaving on the Trailways bus for Asheville to discuss some
issues with the army. He figured he had more disability due him and was off to see about
it and wouldnt be back for three or four days. Hed never told Kya his business, where he
was going, or when he was coming back, so, standing there in her too-short bib overalls,
she stared up at him, mute.
Ah bleeve ya deaf and dumb as all git-out, he said, the porch door slapping behind
him.
Kya watched him gimp along the path, left leg swinging to the side, then forward. Her
fingers knotted. Maybe they were all going to leave her, one by one down this lane.
When he reached the road and unexpectedly looked back, she threw her hand up and
waved hard. A shot to keep him tethered. Pa lifted an arm in a quick, dismissive
salutation. But it was something. It was more than Ma had done.
From there, she wandered to the lagoon, where early light caught the glimmer of
hundreds of dragonfly wings. Oaks and thick brush encircled the water, darkening it
cavelike, and she stopped as she eyed Pas boat drifting there on the line. If she took it
into the marsh and he found out, hed take his belt to her. Or the paddle he kept by the
porch door; the welcome bat, Jodie had called it.
Perhaps a yearning to reach out yonder pulled her toward the boata bent-up, flatbottomed
metal skiff Pa used for fishing. Shed been out in it all her life, usually with
Jodie. Sometimes hed let her steer. She even knew the way through some of the
intricate channels and estuaries that wandered through a patchwork of water and land,
land and water, finally to the sea. Because even though the ocean was just beyond the
trees surrounding the shack, the only way to get there by boat was to go in the opposite
direction, inland, and wind through miles of the maze of waterways that eventually
hooked back to the sea.
But, being only seven and a girl, shed never taken the boat out by herself. It floated
there, tied by a single cotton line to a log. Gray grunge, frayed fishing tackle, and halfcrushed
beer cans covered the boat floor. Stepping in, she said out loud, Gotta check the
gas like Jodie said, so Pa wont figure I took it. She poked a broken reed into the rusted
tank. Nough for a short ride, I reckon.
Like any good robber, she looked around, then flicked the cotton line free of the log
and poled forward with the lone paddle. The silent cloud of dragonflies parted before her.
Not able to resist, she pulled the starter rope and jerked back when the motor caught
the first time, sputtering and burping white smoke. Grabbing the tiller, she turned the
throttle too far, and the boat turned sharply, the engine screaming. She released the
throttle, threw her hands up, and the boat eased to a drift, purring.
When in trouble, just let go. Go back to idle.
Accelerating now more gently, she steered around the old fallen cypress, putt, putt,
putt beyond the piled sticks of the beaver lodge. Then, holding her breath, she steered
toward the lagoon entrance, almost hidden by brambles. Ducking beneath the lowhanging
limbs of giant trees, she churned slowly through thicket for more than a hundred
yards, as easy turtles slid from water-logs. A floating mat of duckweed colored the water
as green as the leafy ceiling, creating an emerald tunnel. Finally, the trees parted, and
she glided into a place of wide sky and reaching grasses, and the sounds of cawing birds.
The view a chick gets, she reckoned, when it finally breaks its shell.
Kya tooled along, a tiny speck of a girl in a boat, turning this way and that as endless
estuaries branched and braided before her. Keep left at all the turns going out, Jodie had
said. She barely touched the throttle, easing the boat through the current, keeping the
noise low. As she broke around a stand of reeds, a whitetail doe with last springs fawn
stood lapping water. Their heads jerked up, slinging droplets through the air. Kya didnt
stop or they would bolt, a lesson shed learned from watching wild turkeys: if you act like
a predator, they act like prey. Just ignore them, keep going slow. She drifted by, and the
deer stood as still as a pine until Kya disappeared beyond the salt grass.
She entered a place with dark lagoons in a throat of oaks and remembered a channel
on the far side that flowed to an enormous estuary. Several times she came upon dead
ends, had to backtrack to take another turn. Keeping all these landmarks straight in her
mind so she could get back. Finally the estuary lay ahead, water stretching so far it
captured the whole sky and all the clouds within it.
The tide was going out, she knew by water lines along the creek shores. When it
receded enough, any time from now, some channels would shallow up and shed run
aground, get stranded. Shed have to head back before then.
As she rounded a stand of tall grass, suddenly the oceans facegray, stern, and
pulsingfrowned at her. Waves slammed one another, awash in their own white saliva,
breaking apart on the shore with loud boomsenergy searching for a beachhead. Then
they flattened into quiet tongues of foam, waiting for the next surge.
The surf taunted her, daring her to breach the waves and enter the sea, but without
Jodie, her courage failed. Time to turn around anyway. Thunderheads grew in the
western sky, forming huge gray mushrooms pressing at the seams.
Thered been no other people, not even distant boats, so it was a surprise when she
entered the large estuary again, and there, close against the marsh grass, was a boy
fishing from another battered rig. Her course would take her only twenty feet from him.
By now, she looked every bit the swamp childhair blown into tangles, dusty cheeks
streaked with wind-tears.
Neither low gas nor storm threat gave her the same edgy feeling as seeing another
person, especially a boy. Ma had told her older sisters to watch out for them; if you look
tempting, men turn into predators. Squishing her lips tight, she thought, What am I
gonna do? I gotta go right by him.
From the corner of her eye, she saw he was thin, his golden curls stuffed under a red
baseball cap. Much older than she, eleven, maybe twelve. Her face was grim as she
approached, but he smiled at her, warm and open, and touched the brim of his hat like a
gentleman greeting a fine lady in a gown and bonnet. She nodded slightly, then looked
ahead, increasing the throttle and passing him by.
All she could think of now was getting back to familiar footing, but somewhere she
must have turned wrong, for when she reached the second string of lagoons, she couldnt
find the channel that led home. Round and round, near oak knees and myrtle thickets,
she searched. A slow panic eased in. Now, the grass banks, sandbars, and bends all
looked the same. She cut the engine and stood smack-dab in the middle of the boat,
balancing with feet spread wide, trying to see over the reeds, but couldnt. She sat. Lost.
Low on gas. Storm coming.
Stealing Pas words, she cussed her brother for leaving. Damn ya, Jodie! Shit fire an
fall in. You just shit fire an fall in it.
She whimpered once as the boat drifted in soft current. Clouds, gaining ground against
the sun, moved weighted but silent overhead, pushing the sky and dragging shadows
across the clear water. Could be a gale any minute. Worse, though: if she wandered too
long, Pa would know she took the boat. She eased ahead; maybe she could find that boy.
Another few minutes of creek brought a bend and the large estuary ahead, and on the
other side, the boy in his boat. Egrets took flight, a line of white flags against the
mounting gray clouds. She anchored him hard with her eyes. Afraid to go near him, afraid
not to. Finally, she turned across the estuary.
He looked up when she neared.
Hey, he said.
Hey. She looked beyond his shoulder into the reeds.
Which way you headed, anyhow? he asked. Not out, I hope. That storms comin.
No, she said, looking down at the water.
You okay?
Her throat tightened against a sob. She nodded but couldnt speak.
You lost?
She bobbed her head again. Wasnt going to cry like a girl.
Well, then. I git lost all the time, he said, and smiled. Hey, I know you. Youre Jodie
Clarks sister.
I used ta be. Hes gone.
Well, youre still his . . . But he let it drop.
Howd you know me? She threw a quick, direct look at his eyes.
Oh, Ive been fishin with Jodie some. I saw you a couple a times. You were just a
little kid. Youre Kya, right?
Someone knew her name. She was taken aback. Felt anchored to something; released
from something else.
Yeah. You know my place? From here?
Reckon I do. Its bout time anyhow. He nodded at the clouds. Follow me. He pulled
his line, put tackle in the box, and started his outboard. As he headed across the estuary,
he waved, and she followed. Cruising slowly, he went directly to the right channel, looked
back to make sure shed made the turn, and kept going. He did that at every bend to the
oak lagoons. As he turned into the dark waterway toward home, she could see where
shed gone wrong, and would never make the mistake again.
He guided hereven after she waved that she knew her wayacross her lagoon, up to
the shore where the shack squatted in the woods. She motored up to the old waterlogged
pine and tied up. He drifted back from her boat, bobbing in their contrary wakes.
You okay now?
Yeah.
Well, storms comin, I better git.
She nodded, then remembered how Ma taught her. Thank ya.
All right, then. My names Tate case ya see me again.
She didnt respond, so he said, Bye now.
As he headed out, slow raindrops splattered the lagoon beach, and she said, Its
gonna rain bullfrogs; that boyll get soaked through.
She stooped to the gas tank and stuck in her reed dipstick, cupping her hands around
the rim, so rain wouldnt drop in. Maybe she couldnt count coins, but she knew for sure,
you cant let water get in gas.
Its way low. Pas gonna know. I gotta tote a can to the Sing Oil fore Pa gits back.
She knew the owner, Mr. Johnny Lane, always referred to her family as swamp trash,
but dealing with him, the storms, and tides would be worth it, because all she could think
of now was getting back into that space of grass and sky and water. Alone, shed been
scared, but that was already humming as excitement. There was something else, too.
The calmness of the boy. Shed never known anybody to speak or move so steady. So
sure and easy. Just being near him, and not even that close, had eased her tightness. For
the first time since Ma and Jodie left, she breathed without pain; felt something other
than the hurt. She needed this boat and that boy.
  
THAT SAME AFTERNOON, holding his bike by the handlebars, Tate Walker strolled through
town, nodding at Miss Pansy in the Five and Dime, and past the Western Auto to the tip
of the town wharf. He scanned the sea for his dads shrimp boat, The Cherry Pie, and
spotted its bright red paint far out, the wide net-wings rocking with the swells. As it
neared, escorted by its own cloud of gulls, he waved, and his father, a large man with
mountain shoulders and thick red hair and a beard, threw his hand in the air. Scupper, as
everyone in the village called him, tossed the line to Tate, who tied up, then jumped on
board to help the crew unload the catch.
Scupper tousled Tates hair. Hows it, son? Thanks for coming by.
Tate smiled, nodded. Sure. They and the crew busied about, loading shrimp into
crates, toting them to the wharf, calling out to one another about grabbing beers at the
Dog-Gone, asking Tate about school. Taller by a hand than the other men, Scupper
scooped up three wire crates at a time, carrying them across the plank, going back for
more. His fists were bear-sized, knuckles chapped and split. In less than forty minutes the
deck was hosed, nets tied, lines secured.
He told the crew hed join them another day for beer; he had to do some tuning up
before going home. In the wheelhouse, Scupper put a 78 record of Miliza Korjus on the
player strapped to the counter and turned the volume up. He and Tate went below and
squeezed into the engine hold, where Tate handed tools to his dad as he greased parts
and tightened bolts by a dim lightbulb. All the while the soaring, sweet opera lifted higher
into the sky.
Scuppers great-great-grandfather, emigrating from Scotland, had shipwrecked off the
coast of North Carolina in the 1760s and was the only survivor. He swam to shore,
landing on the Outer Banks, found a wife, and fathered thirteen children. Many could
trace their roots back to that one Mr. Walker, but Scupper and Tate stayed mostly to
themselves. Didnt join the Sunday picnic spreads of chicken salad and deviled eggs with
their relatives often, not like they had when his mother and sister were still there.
Finally, in the graying dusk, Scupper slapped Tate on the shoulders. All done. Lets get
home, get supper on.
They walked up the wharf, down Main, and out a winding road to their house, a twostory
with weathered cedar-shake siding, built in the 1800s. The white window trim had
been painted fresh, and the lawn running almost to the sea was cut neat. But the azaleas
and rosebushes next to the house sulked in weeds.
Pulling off yellow boots in the mudroom, Scupper asked, You tired of burgers?
Never tired of burgers.
Tate stood at the kitchen counter, picking up globs of hamburger meat, forming
patties, and placing them on a plate. His mother and sister, Carianne, both wearing
baseball caps, grinned at him from a picture hanging next to the window. Carianne loved
that Atlanta Crackers cap, had worn it everywhere.
He looked away from them, started slicing tomatoes, stirring baked beans. If not for
him, theyd be here. His mother basting a chicken, Carianne cutting biscuits.
As usual Scupper got the burgers a bit black, but they were juicy inside and thick as a
small city phone book. Both hungry, they ate in silence for a while, and then Scupper
asked Tate about school.
Biologys good; I like it, but were doing poetry in English class. Cant say I like it
much. We each gotta read one out loud. You used to recite some, but I dont remember
them.
I got the poem for you, son, Scupper said. My favoriteThe Cremation of Sam
McGee by Robert Service. Used to read it out to yall. Was your mamas favorite. She
laughed every time I read it, never got tired of it.
Tate looked down at the mention of his mother, pushed his beans around.
Scupper went on. Dont go thinking poetrys just for sissies. Theres mushy love
poems, for sure, but theres also funny ones, lots about nature, war even. Whole point of
itthey make ya feel something. His dad had told him many times that the definition of
a real man is one who cries without shame, reads poetry with his heart, feels opera in his
soul, and does whats necessary to defend a woman. Scupper walked to the sitting room,
calling back, I used to know most of it by heart, but not anymore. But here it is, Ill read
it to ya. He sat back down at the table and began reading. When he got to this segment:
And there sat Sam, looking cool and calm, in the heart of the furnace roar;
And he wore a smile you could see a mile, and he said, Please close that
door.
Its fine in here, but I greatly fear youll let in the cold and storm
Since I left Plumtree down in Tennessee, its the first time Ive been warm.
Scupper and Tate chuckled.
Your mom always laughed at that.
They smiled, remembering. Just sat there a minute. Then Scupper said hed wash up
while Tate did his homework. In his room, scanning through the poetry book for one to
read in class, Tate found a poem by Thomas Moore:
. . . shes gone to the Lake of the Dismal Swamp,
Where, all night long, by a fire-fly lamp,
She paddles her white canoe.
And her fire-fly lamp I soon shall see,
And her paddle I soon shall hear;
Long and loving our life shall be,
And Ill hide the maid in a cypress tree,
When the footstep of death is near.
The words made him think of Kya, Jodies little sister. Shed seemed so small and
alone in the marshs big sweep. He imagined his own sister lost out there. His dad was
rightpoems made you feel something.
7.
The Fishing Season
1952
That evening, after the fishing boy led her home through the marsh, Kya sat cross-legged
on her porch bed. Mist from the downpour eased through the patched-up screen, touching
her face. She thought about the boy. Kind yet strong, like Jodie. The only people she ever
spoke to were Pa now and then and, even less often, the cash-register lady at the Piggly
Wiggly, Mrs. Singletary, who had recently taken to teaching Kya the difference between
quarters, nickels, and dimesshe already knew about pennies. But Mrs. Singletary could
also get nosey.
Dahlin, whats yo name, anyhow? And why dont yo ma come in anymore? Havent
seen er since the turnips put out.
Mas got lots of chores, so she sends me to the store.
Yeah, dear, but ya never buy nears enough for yo family.
Ya know, maam, I gotta go. Ma needs these grits right away.
When possible, Kya avoided Mrs. Singletary, using the other checkout lady, who didnt
show any interest except to say kids shouldnt come to the market barefoot. She thought
of telling the lady she didnt plan to pick grapes with her toes. Who could afford grapes,
anyhow?
More and more Kya didnt talk to anybody but the gulls. She wondered if she could
strike some bargain with Pa to use his boat. Out in the marsh, she could collect feathers
and shells and maybe see the boy sometimes. Shed never had a friend, but she could
feel the use of it, the pull. They could boat around in the estuaries some, explore the
fens. He might think of her as a little kid, but he knew his way around the marsh and
might teach her.
Pa didnt have a car. He used the boat to fish, to go to town, to maneuver through the
swamp to the Swamp Guinea, a weathered bar and poker joint connected to solid ground
by a rickety boardwalk through cattails. Made of rough-cut clapboard under a tin roof, it
rambled from one add-on to the next, the floor at different levels depending on how high
the brick chicken-legs perched it above the swamp. When Pa went there or anywhere, he
took the boat, only rarely walked, so why would he lend it to her?
But hed let her brothers use it when he wasnt, probably because they caught fish for
supper. She had no interest in fishing, but maybe she could trade something else, figuring
that was the way to reach him. Cook maybe, do more around the house, until Ma came
back.
The rain eased. A single drop, here then there, shook a leaf like the flick of a cats ear.
Kya hopped up, cleaned out the Frigidaire-cupboard, mopped the stained plywood kitchen
floor, and scraped off months of caked-on grits from the woodstove burners. Early the
next morning, she scrubbed Pas sheets, reeking of sweat and whiskey, and draped them
over the palmettos. She went through her brothers room, not much bigger than a closet,
dusting and sweeping. Dirty socks were piled in the back of the closet and yellowed comic
books strewn next to the two soiled mattresses on the floor. She tried to see the boys
faces, the feet that went with the socks, but the details blurred. Even Jodies face was
fading; shed see his eyes for an instant, then theyd slip away, closing.
The next morning, carrying a gallon can, she walked the sandy tracks to the Piggly and
bought matches, backbone, and salt. Saved out two dimes. Cant get milk, gotta get
gas.
She stopped by the Sing Oil filling station just outside Barkley Cove, which stood in a
grove of pines surrounded by rusted-out trucks and jalopy cars stacked on cement blocks.
Mr. Lane saw Kya coming. Git on outta here, ya little beggar-hen. Marsh trash.
I got cash money, Mr. Lane. I need gas and oil for Pas boat motor. She held out two
dimes, two nickels, and five pennies.
Well, it aint hardly worth ma trouble for such a piddly sum, but cmon, give it here.
He reached for the bent-up, square container.
She thanked Mr. Lane, who grunted again. The groceries and gas weighed more with
every mile, and it took some time to get home. Finally in the shade of the lagoon, she
emptied the can into the gas tank and scrubbed the boat with rags and wet sand for grist
until the metal sides showed through the grime.
  
ON THE FOURTH DAY after Pa left, she started keeping a lookout. By late afternoon a cold
dread set in and her breathing shallowed up. Here she was again, staring down the lane.
Mean as he was, she needed him to come back. Finally, in the early evening, there he
came, walking the sandy ruts. She ran to the kitchen and laid out a goulash of boiled
mustard greens, backbone, and grits. She didnt know how to make gravy, so poured the
backbone stockfloating with morsels of white fatinto an empty jelly jar. The plates
were cracked and didnt match, but she had the fork on the left, the knife on the right like
Ma taught her. Then she waited, flattened up against the Frigidaire like a roadkill stork.
He banged the front door open against the wall and walked through the sitting room to
his bedroom in three strides, without calling her or looking in the kitchen. That was
normal. She heard him putting his case on the floor, pulling out drawers. Hed notice the
fresh bedding, the clean floor for sure. If not his eyes, his nose would catch the
difference.
In a few minutes he stepped out, straight into the kitchen, and looked at the set table,
at the steaming bowls of food. He saw her standing against the fridge, and they stared at
each other like theyd never seen each other before.
Ah swannee, girl, whats a this? Looks like ya went an got all growed up. Cookin and
all. He didnt smile, but his face was calm. He was unshaven, with dark unwashed hair
hanging across his left temple. But he was sober; she knew the signs.
Yessir. I fixed cornbread too, but it didnt come out.
Well, ah thankee. Thats a mighty good girl. Ahm plumb wore out and hungry as a
wallow-hog. He pulled out a chair and sat, so she did the same. In silence they filled
their plates and picked stringy meat from the stingy backbones. He lifted a vertebra and
sucked out the marrow, fatty juice glistening on his whiskered cheeks. Gnawed on those
bones till they were slick as silk ribbons.
This heres bettern a cold collard sandwich, he said.
I wish the cornbreadd come out. Maybe shoulda put more soda in, less eggs. Kya
couldnt believe she was talking on so, but couldnt stop herself. Ma made it so good, but
I guess I didnt pay enough mind to the details . . . Then thought she shouldnt be talking
about Ma, so hushed up.
Pa pushed his plate toward her. Nough for a dab more?
Yessir, theres aplenty.
Oh, and tump some of that cornbread right in tha stew. Ah got a hankerin for soppin
up the stock, and my bet is that breads just fine, mushy like spoonbread.
She smiled to herself as she filled his plate. Who wouldve thought theyd find
cornbread as a footing.
But now, after thinking about it, she worried that if she asked to use the boat, he
would think shed cooked and cleaned only for the favor, which was how it started out,
but now seemed somehow different. She liked sitting down and eating like a family. Her
need to talk to somebody felt urgent.
So she didnt mention using the boat by herself, instead asked, Can I go out fishin
with ya sometime?
He laughed hard, but it was kind. The first time hed laughed since Ma and the others
left. So ya wanta go fishin?
Yessir, I do.
Youre a girl, he said, looking at his plate, chewing backbone.
Yessir, Im your girl.
Well, Ah might could take ya out sometime.
The next morning, as Kya careened down the sandy lane, her arms held straight out,
she sputtered wet noises from her lips, spittle spraying. She would lift off and sail over
the marsh, looking for nests, then rise and fly wing to wing with eagles. Her fingers
became long feathers, splayed against the sky, gathering the wind beneath her. Then
suddenly she was jerked back to Earth by Pa hollering to her from the boat. Her wings
collapsed, stomach pitched; he must have figured out shed used it. She could already
feel the paddle on her bottom and the backs of her legs. She knew how to hide, wait until
he was drunk, and hed never find her. But she was too far down the lane, in full view,
and there he was standing with all his poles and rods, motioning for her to come. She
walked over, quiet, scared. The fishing tackle was strewn about, a poke of corn likker
tucked under his seat.
Git in was all he said as invitation. She started to express glee or gratitude, but his
blank expression kept her quiet, as she stepped to the bow and sat on the metal seat
facing forward. He pull-cranked and they headed up the channel, ducking the overgrowth
as they cruised up and down the waterways, Kya memorizing broken trees and old stump
signposts. He eased the motor down in a backwater and motioned for her to sit on the
center seat.
Go on now, scratch some worms from the can, he said, a hand-rolled cigarette
hanging at the corner of his mouth. He taught her to snag the bait, to cast and reel. It
seemed he contorted his body in odd postures to avoid brushing against her. They only
talked fishing; never ventured to other subjects, neither smiled often, but on common
ground they were steady. He drank some likker but then got busy and didnt drink more.
At late day, the sun sighed, fading to the color of butter, and they may not have noticed,
but their own shoulders finally rounded and their necks slacked.
Secretly Kya hoped not to catch a fish, but she felt a tug, jerked her line, and raised a
thick bream, flashing silver and blue. Pa leaned out and snatched it in the net, then sat
back, slapping his knee and yahooing like shed never seen. She grinned wide and they
looked into each others eyes, closing a circuit.
Before Pa strung it up, the bream flopped around in the boat bottom and Kya had to
watch a distant string of pelicans, study the cloud forms, anything but look into dying fish
eyes staring at a world without water, wide mouth sucking worthless air. But what it cost
her and what it cost that fish was worth it to have this little shred of family. Perhaps not
for the fish, but still.
They went out in the boat again the next day, and in a dark lagoon, Kya spotted the
soft breast feathers of a great horned owl floating on the surface. Each curled at both
ends, so that they drifted around like tiny orange boats. She scooped them up and put
them in her pocket. Later she found an abandoned hummingbird nest woven onto an
outstretched branch, and tucked it safely in the bow.
That evening, Pa cooked up a supper of fried fishcoated in cornmeal and black
pepperserved with grits and greens. As Kya washed up after, Pa walked into the
kitchen, carrying his old World War IIissue knapsack. Standing near the door, he flung it
roughly onto one of the chairs. It slid to the floor with a thud, which made her jump and
whirl around.
Thought ya could use that fer yo feathers, bird nests, and all that other stuff ya
clect.
Oh, Kya said. Oh, thank ya. But he was already out the porch door. She picked up
the frayed knapsack, made of canvas tough enough for a lifetime and covered in small
pockets and secret compartments. Heavy-duty zips. She stared out the window. He had
never given her anything.
  
EVERY WARMISH DAY OF WINTER and every day of spring, Pa and Kya went out, far up and
down the coast, trolling, casting, and reeling. Whether in estuary or creek, she scanned
for that boy Tate in his boat, hoping to see him again. She thought about him sometimes,
wanted to be his friend, but had no idea how to go about it or even how to find him.
Then, just like that, one afternoon she and Pa came around a bend, and there he was
fishing, almost in that same spot where she first saw him. Right off, he grinned and
waved. Without thinking, she threw her hand up and waved back, almost smiling. Then
dropped her hand just as quick when Pa looked at her, surprised.
One a Jodies friends, before he left, she said.
Ya gotta watch out for folks round here, he said. Woodsre full a white trash. Pert
near everbody out heres a no-count.
She nodded. Wanted to look back at the boy, but didnt. Then worried he would think
her unfriendly.
Pa knew the marsh the way a hawk knows his meadow: how to hunt, how to hide, how
to terrorize intruders. And Kyas wide-eyed questions spurred him to explain goose
seasons, fish habits, how to read weather in the clouds and riptides in the waves.
Some days she packed a picnic supper in the knapsack and they ate crumbly
cornbread, which she had almost mastered, with sliced onions, as the setting sun posed
over the marsh. Occasionally, he forgot the bootleg and they drank tea from jelly jars.
My folks werent always po, ya know, Pa blurted out one day as they sat in oak
shadows, casting lines across a brown lagoon buzzing with low-flying insects.
They had land, rich land, raised tobaccy and cottn and such. Over near Asheville. Yo
gramma on my side wore bonnets big as wagon wheels and long skirts. We lived in a
house wif a verander that went a the way around, two stories high. It wa fine, mighty
fine.
A gramma. Kyas lips parted. Somewhere, there was or had been a grandmother.
Where was she now? Kya longed to ask what happened to everybody. But was afraid.
Pa continued on his own. Then it all went wrong together. Ah was a youngun through
most of it, so dont know, but there was the Dpression, cottn weevils, Ah dont know
what all, and it was gone. Only thang left was debts, lotsa debts.
With these sketchy details, Kya struggled to visualize his past. There was nothing of
Mas history. Pa would go into a rage if any of them talked about their lives before Kya
was born. She knew her family had lived somewhere far away before the marsh, near her
other grandparents, a place where Ma wore store-bought dresses with small pearly
buttons, satin ribbons, and lace trim. After they moved into the shack, Ma kept the
dresses in trunks, taking one out every few years and stripping it down for a work smock
because there was no money for anything new. Now those fine clothes along with their
story were gone, burned in the bonfire Pa started after Jodie left.
Kya and Pa cast some more, their lines swishing over soft yellow pollen floating on the
still water, and she thought that was the end of it, but he added, Someday Ahll take ya
to Asheville, show ya the land that was ourn, shoulda been yourn.
After a bit he jerked his line. Looky here, hon, Ah got us a big un, big as Alabamee!
Back in the shack they fried the fish and hush puppies fat as goose aigs. Then she
displayed her collections, carefully pinning the insects to pieces of cardboard and the
feathers to the wall of the back bedroom in a soft, stirring collage. Later she lay in her
bed on the porch listening to the pines. She closed her eyes, and then opened them wide.
He had called her hon.
8.
Negative Data
1969
After finishing their mornings investigative work at the fire tower, Sheriff Ed Jackson and
Deputy Joe Purdue escorted Chases widow, Pearl, and his parents, Patti Love and Sam,
to see him lying on a steel table under a sheet in a chilled lab at the clinic, which served
as a morgue. To say good-bye. But it was too cold for any mother; unbearable for any
wife. Both women had to be helped from the room.
Back at the sheriffs office, Joe said, Well, that was as bad as it gets . . .
Yeah. Dont know how anybody gets through it.
Sam didnt say a word. He never was a talker, but thisll do him in.
Saltwater marsh, some say, can eat a cement block for breakfast, and not even the
sheriffs bunker-style office could keep it at bay. Watermarks, outlined with salt crystals,
waved across the lower walls, and black mildew spread like blood vessels toward the
ceiling. Tiny dark mushrooms hunkered in the corners.
The sheriff pulled a bottle from the bottom drawer of his desk and poured them both a
double in coffee mugs. They sipped until the sun, as golden and syrupy as the bourbon,
slipped into the sea.
  
FOUR DAYS LATER, Joe, waving documents in the air, entered the sheriffs office. I got the
first of the lab reports.
Lets have a look.
They sat on opposite sides of the sheriffs desk, scanning. Joe, now and then, swatted
at a single housefly.
Ed read out loud, Time of death between midnight and two A.M., October 29 to 30,
1969. Just what we thought.
After a minute of reading, he continued. What we have is negative data.
You got that right. There aint a thing here, Sheriff.
Except for the two boys going up to the third switchback, therere no fresh fingerprints
on the railing, the grates, nothing. None from Chase or anybody else. Afternoon whiskers
shadowed the sheriffs otherwise ruddy complexion.
So somebody wiped em clean. Everything. If nothing else, why arent his fingerprints
on the railing, the grate?
Exactly. First we had no footprintsnow no fingerprints. Theres no evidence at all
that he walked across the mud to the steps, walked up the steps, or opened the two
grates at the topthe one above the stairs and the one he fell through. Or that anybody
else did either. But negative datas still data. Somebody cleaned up real good or killed
him somewhere else and moved his body to the tower.
But if his body was hauled to the tower, thered be tire tracks.
Right, we need to go back out there, look for tread marks besides ours and the
ambulance. May have overlooked something.
After a minute more of reading, Ed said, Anyway, Im confident now, this was no
accident.
Joe said, I agree, and not just anybody can wipe up tracks this good.
Im hungry. Lets go by the diner on the way out there.
Well, get ready for an ambush. Everybody in towns pretty riled up. Chase Andrewss
murders the biggest things happened round here, maybe ever. Gossips goin up like
smoke signals.
Well, keep an ear out. We might pick up a tidbit or two. Most neer-do-wells cant
keep their mouths shut.
A full bank of windows, framed by hurricane shutters, covered the front of the Barkley
Cove Diner, which overlooked the harbor. Only the narrow street stood between the
building, constructed in 1889, and the soggy steps of the village pier. Discarded shrimp
baskets and wadded-up fishing nets lined the wall under the windows, and here and
there, mollusk shells littered the sidewalk. Everywhere: seabird cries, seabird dung. The
aroma of sausage and biscuits, boiled turnip greens, and fried chicken thankfully overtook
the high smell of fish barrels lining the dock.
A mild bustle spilled out when the sheriff opened the door. Every boothhigh-backed
with red padded upholsterywas taken, as were most of the tables. Joe pointed to two
empty stools at the soda fountain counter, and the two walked toward them.
On the way they heard Mr. Lane from the Sing Oil saying to his diesel mechanic, I
reckon it was Lamar Sands. Ya rmember, he caught his wife doin a number wif Chase
right on the deck of his fancy ski boat. Theres motive, and Lamars had other run-ins wif
tha law.
What run-ins?
He was wif that bunch that slit the sheriffs tars.
They were just kids back then.
Thar was sumpm else too, I just caint rmember.
Behind the counter, owner-cook Jim Bo Sweeny darted from flipping crab cakes on the
griddle to stirring a pot of creamed corn on the burner to poking chicken thighs in the
deep fryer, then back again. Putting piled-high plates in front of customers in between.
People said he could mix biscuit dough with one hand while filleting a catfish with the
other. He offered up his famous specialtygrilled flounder stuffed with shrimp served on
pimento-cheese gritsonly a few times a year. No advertising needed; word got out.
As the sheriff and deputy wove among the tables toward the counter, they heard Miss
Pansy Price of Kresss Five and Dime say to a friend, It coulda been that woman lives out
in the marsh. Crazy nough for the loony bin. I jus bet shed be up to this kinda thing . . .
What dya mean? Whatd she have to do with anything?
Well, for a while thar, she was got herself involved wif . . .
As the sheriff and deputy stepped up to the counter, Ed said, Lets just order take-out
poboys and get out of here. We cant get dragged into all this.
9.
Jumpin
1953
Sitting in the bow, Kya watched low fingers of fog reaching for their boat. At first, torn-off
cloud bits streamed over their heads, then mist engulfed them in grayness, and there was
only the tick, tick, tick of the quiet motor. Minutes later, small splotches of unexpected
color formed as the weathered shape of the marina gas station eased into view, as
though it and not them was moving. Pa motored in, bumping gently against the dock.
Shed only been here once. The owner, an old black man, sprang up from his chair to help
themthe reason everybody called him Jumpin. His white sideburns and salt-and-pepper
hair framed a wide, generous face and owl eyes. Tall and spare, he seemed to never stop
talking, smiling, or throwing his head back, lips shut tight in his own brand of laugh. He
didnt dress in overalls, like most workmen around, but wore an ironed blue button-down
shirt, too-short dark trousers, and work boots. Not often, but now and then on the
meanest summer days, a tattered straw hat.
His Gas and Bait teetered on its own wobbly wharf. A cable ran from the closest oak on
shore, about forty feet across the backwater, and held on with all its might. Jumpins
great-grandpa had built the wharf and shack of cypress planks way back before anybody
could remember, sometime before the Civil War.
Three generations had nailed bright metal signsNehi Grape Soda, Royal Crown Cola,
Camel Filters, and twenty years worth of North Carolina automobile license platesall
over the shack, and that burst of color could be seen from the sea through all but the
thickest fog.
Hello, Mister Jake. How ya doin?
Well, Ah woke up on the right side of dirt, Pa answered.
Jumpin laughed as if hed never heard the worn-out phrase. Ya got your lil daughter
with you an all. Thats mighty fine.
Pa nodded. Then, as an afterthought, Yep, this heres ma daughter, Miz Kya Clark.
Well, Im mighty proud to know ya, Miss Kya.
Kya searched her bare toes but found no words.
Jumpin wasnt bothered and kept talking about the good fishing lately. Then he asked
Pa, Fill er up then, Mister Jake?
Yeah, slam er right up to tha top.
The men talked weather, fishing, then more weather till the tank was full.
Good day to yall, now, he said, as he tossed off the line.
Pa cruised slowly back onto a bright seathe sun taking less time to devour the fog
than it took Jumpin to fill a tank. They chugged around a piney peninsula for several
miles to Barkley Cove, where Pa tied to the deeply etched beams of the town wharf.
Fishermen busied about, packing fish, tying line.
Ah reckon we can git us some restrant vittles, Pa said, and led her along the pier
toward the Barkley Cove Diner. Kya had never eaten restaurant food; had never set foot
inside. Her heart thumped as she brushed dried mud from her way-too-short overalls and
patted down her tangled hair. As Pa opened the door, every customer paused midbite. A
few men nodded faintly at Pa; the women frowned and turned their heads. One snorted,
Well, they probly cant read the shirt and shoes required.
Pa motioned for her to sit at a small table overlooking the wharf. She couldnt read the
menu, but he told her most of it, and she ordered fried chicken, mashed potatoes, gravy,
white acre peas, and biscuits fluffy as fresh-picked cotton. He had fried shrimp, cheese
grits, fried okree, and fried green tomatoes. The waitress put a whole dish of butter
pats perched on ice cubes and a basket of cornbread and biscuits on their table, and all
the sweet iced tea they could drink. Then they had blackberry cobbler with ice cream for
dessert. So full, Kya thought she might get sick, but figured itd be worth it.
As Pa stood at the cash register paying the bill, Kya stepped out onto the sidewalk,
where the ripe smell of fishing boats hung over the bay. She held a greasy napkin
wrapped around the leftover chicken and biscuits. Her overalls pockets were stuffed with
packages of saltines, which the waitress had left right on the table for the taking.
Hi. Kya heard a tiny voice behind her and turned to see a girl of about four years
with blond ringlets looking up at her. She was dressed in a pale blue frock and reached
out her hand. Kya stared at the little hand; it was puffy-soft and maybe the cleanest thing
Kya had ever seen. Never scrubbed with lye soap, certainly no mussel mud beneath the
nails. Then she looked into the girls eyes, in which she herself was reflected as just
another kid.
Kya shifted the napkin to her left hand and extended her right slowly toward the girls.
Hey there, get away! Suddenly Mrs. Teresa White, wife of the Methodist preacher,
rushed from the door of the Buster Brown Shoe Shop.
Barkley Cove served its religion hard-boiled and deep-fried. Tiny as it was, the village
supported four churches, and those were just for the whites; the blacks had three more.
Of course, the pastors and preachers, and certainly their wives, enjoyed highly
respected positions in the village, always dressing and behaving accordingly. Teresa
White often wore pastel skirts and white blouses, matching pumps and purse.
Now she hurried toward her daughter and lifted her in her arms. Stepping away from
Kya, she put the girl back on the sidewalk and squatted next to the child.
Meryl Lynn, dahlin, dont go near that girl, ya hear me. Shes dirty.
Kya watched the mother run her fingers through the curls; didnt miss how long they
held each others eyes.
A woman came out of the Piggly Wiggly and walked quickly up to them. Ya all right,
Teresa? What happened here? Was that girl botherin Meryl Lynn?
I saw her in time. Thank you, Jenny. I wish those people wouldnt come to town. Look
at her. Filthy. Plumb nasty. Theres that stomach flu goin around and I just know for a
fact it came in with them. Last year they brought in that case of measles, and thats
serious. Teresa walked away, clutching the child.
Just then Pa, carrying some beer in a brown paper bag, called behind her, Whatcha
doin? Cmon, we gotta git outta here. Tides goin out. Kya turned and followed, and as
they steered home to the marsh, she saw the curls and eyes of mother and child.
Pa still disappeared some, not coming back for several days, but not as often as
before. And when he did show up, he didnt collapse in a stupor but ate a meal and talked
some. One night they played gin rummy, he guffawing when she won, and she giggling
with her hands over her mouth like a regular girl.
  
EACH TIME KYA STEPPED off the porch, she looked down the lane, thinking that even though
the wild wisteria was fading with late spring and her mother had left late the previous
summer, she might see Ma walking home through the sand. Still in her fake alligator
heels. Now that she and Pa were fishing and talking, maybe they could try again to be a
family. Pa had beat all of them, mostly when he was drunk. Hed be all right for a few
days at a timethey would eat chicken stew together; once they flew a kite on the
beach. Then: drink, shout, hit. Details of some of the bouts were sharp in her mind. Once
Pa shoved Ma into the kitchen wall, hitting her until she slumped to the floor. Kya,
sobbing for him to quit, touched his arm. He grabbed Kya by the shoulders, shouted for
her to pull down her jeans and underpants, and bent her over the kitchen table. In one
smooth, practiced motion he slid the belt from his pants and whipped her. Of course, she
remembered the hot pain slicing her bare bottom, but curiously, she recalled the jeans
pooled around her skinny ankles in more vivid detail. And Ma crumpled into the corner by
the cookstove, crying out. Kya didnt know what all the fighting was about.
But if Ma came back now, when Pa was acting decent, maybe they could start over.
Kya never thought it would be Ma who left and Pa who stayed. But she knew her mother
wouldnt leave her forever; if she was out there somewhere in the world, shed come
back. Kya could still see the full, red lips as Ma sang to the radio, and hear her words,
Now listen close to Mr. Orson Welles; he speaks proper like a gentleman. Dont ever say
aint, it isnt even a word.
Ma had painted the estuaries and sunsets in oils and watercolors so rich they seemed
peeled from the earth. She had brought some art supplies with her and could buy bits and
pieces at Kresss Five and Dime. Sometimes Ma had let Kya paint her own pictures on
brown paper bags from the Piggly Wiggly.
  
IN EARLY SEPTEMBER of that fishing summer, on one afternoon that paled with heat, Kya
walked to the mailbox at the end of the lane. Leafing through the grocery ads, she
stopped dead when she saw a blue envelope addressed in Mas neat hand. A few
sycamore leaves were turning the same shade of yellow as when she left. All that time
without a trace and now a letter. Kya stared at it, held it to the light, ran her fingers
across the slanted, perfect script. Her heart banged against her chest.
Mas alive. Living somewhere else. Why hasnt she come home? She thought of
tearing the letter open, but the only word she could read for sure was her name, and it
was not on the envelope.
She ran to the shack, but Pa had motored somewhere in the boat. So she propped the
letter against the saltshaker on the table where hed see it. As she boiled black-eyed
peas with onions, she kept an eye on the letter lest it disappear.
Every few seconds, she ducked to the kitchen window to listen for the boats whirr.
Then suddenly Pa was limp-walking up the steps. All courage left her, and she dashed
past him, hollering that she was going to the outhouse; supper would be ready soon. She
stood inside the smelly latrine, her heart running races to her stomach. Balancing on the
wooden bench, she watched through the quarter-moon slit in the door, not knowing
exactly what she expected.
Then the porch door slammed, and she saw Pa walking fast toward the lagoon. He
went straight to the boat, a poke in his hand, and motored away. She ran back to the
house, into the kitchen, but the letter was gone. She flung open his dresser drawers,
rummaged through his closet, searching. Its mine, too! Its mine as much as yours.
Back in the kitchen, she looked in the trash can and found the letters ashes, still fringed
in blue. With a spoon she dipped them up and laid them on the table, a little pile of black
and blue remains. She picked, bit by bit, through the garbage; maybe some words had
drifted to the bottom. But there was nothing but traces of cinder clinging to onionskin.
She sat at the table, the peas still singing in the pot, and stared at the little mound.
Ma touched these. Maybe Pall tell me what she wrote. Dont be stupidthats as likely
as snow fallin in the swamp.
Even the postmark was gone. Now shed never know where Ma was. She put the ashes
in a little bottle and kept it in her cigar box next to her bed.
  
PA DIDNT COME HOME that night or the next day, and when he finally did, it was the old
drunk who staggered through the door. When she mounted the courage to ask about the
letter, he barked, It aint none a yo bidness. And then, She aint comin back, so ya
can just forget bout that. Carrying a poke, he shuffled toward the boat.
That isnt true, Kya hollered at his back, her fists bunched at her sides. She watched
him leaving, then shouted at the empty lagoon, Aint isnt even a word!
Later she would wonder if she should have opened the letter on her own, not even
shown it to Pa. Then she could have saved the words to read someday, and hed have
been better off not knowing them.
Pa never took her fishing again. Those warm days were just a thrown-in season. Low
clouds parting, the sun splashing her world briefly, then closing up dark and tight-fisted
again.
  
KYA COULDNT REMEMBER how to pray. Was it how you held your hands or how hard you
squinted your eyes that mattered? Maybe if I pray, Ma and Jodie will come home. Even
with all the shouting and fussing, that life was better than this lumpy-grits.
She sang mis-snippets of hymnsand He walks with me when dew is still on the
rosesall she remembered from the little white church where Ma had taken her a few
times. Their last visit had been Easter Sunday before Ma left, but all Kya remembered
about the holiday was shouting and blood, somebody falling, she and Ma running, so she
dropped the memory altogether.
Kya looked through the trees at Mas corn and turnip patch, all weeds now. Certainly
there were no roses.
Just forget it. No gods gonna come to this garden.
10.
Just Grass in the Wind
1969
Sand keeps secrets better than mud. The sheriff parked his rig at the beginning of the fire
tower lane so they wouldnt drive over any evidence of someone driving the night of the
alleged murder. But as they walked along the track, looking for vehicle treads other than
their own, sand grains shifted into formless dimples with every step.
Then, at the mud holes and swampy areas near the tower, a profusion of detailed
stories revealed themselves: a raccoon with her four young had trailed in and out of the
muck; a snail had woven a lacy pattern interrupted by the arrival of a bear; and a small
turtle had lain in the cool mud, its belly forming a smooth shallow bowl.
Clear as a picture, but besides our rigs, not a thing man-made.
I dunno, Joe said. See this straight edge, then a little triangle. That could be a
tread.
No, I think thats a bit of turkey print, where a deer stepped on top, made it look
geometrical like that.
After another quarter hour, the sheriff said, Lets hike out to that little bay. See if
somebody boated over here instead of coming by truck. Pushing pungent myrtle from
their faces, they walked to the tiny inlet. The damp sand revealed prints of crabs, herons,
and pipers, but no humans.
Well, but look at this. Joe pointed to a large pattern of disturbed sand crystals that
fanned into an almost perfect half circle. Could be the imprint of a round-bowed boat
that was pulled on shore.
No. See where the wind blew this broken grass stalk back and forth through the sand.
Drawing this half circle. Thats just grass in the wind.
They stood looking around. The rest of the small half-moon beach was covered in a
thick layer of broken shells, a jumble of crustacean parts, and crab claws. Shells the best
secret-keepers of all.
11.
Croker Sacks Full
1956
In the winter of 1956, when Kya was ten, Pa came hobbling to the shack less and less
often. Weeks passed with no whiskey bottle on the floor, no body sprawled on the bed,
no Monday money. She kept expecting to see him limping through the trees, toting his
poke. One full moon, then another had passed since shed seen him.
Sycamore and hickories stretched naked limbs against a dull sky, and the relentless
wind sucked any joy the winter sun might have spread across the bleakness. A useless,
drying wind in a sea-land that couldnt dry.
Sitting on the front steps, she thought about it. A poker-game fight could have ended
with him beat up and dumped in the swamp on a cold, rainy night. Or maybe he just got
fall-down drunk, wandered off into the woods, and fell face-first in the backwater bog.
I guess hes gone for good.
She bit her lips until her mouth turned white. It wasnt like the pain when Ma leftin
fact, she struggled to mourn him at all. But being completely alone was a feeling so vast
it echoed, and the authorities were sure to find out and take her away. Shed have to
pretend, even to Jumpin, that Pa was still around.
And there would be no Monday money. Shed stretched the last few dollars for weeks,
surviving on grits, boiled mussels, and the occasional remnant egg from the rangy hens.
The only remaining supplies were a few matches, a nubbin of soap, and a handful of
grits. A fistful of Blue Tips wouldnt make a winter. Without them she couldnt boil the
grits, which she fixed for herself, the gulls, and the chickens.
I dont know how to do life without grits.
At least, she thought, wherever Pa had disappeared to this time, he had gone on foot.
Kya had the boat.
Of course, shed have to find another way to get food, but for right now she pushed the
thought to a far corner of her mind. After a supper of boiled mussels, which she had
learned to smash into a paste and spread on soda crackers, she thumbed through Mas
beloved books, play-reading the fairy tales. Even at ten she still couldnt read.
Then the kerosene light flickered, faded, and died. One minute there was a soft circle
of a world, and then darkness. She made an oh sound. Pa had always bought the
kerosene and filled the lamp, so she hadnt thought much about it. Until it was dark.
She sat for a few seconds, trying to squeeze light from the leftovers, but there was
almost nothing. Then the rounded hump of the Frigidaire and the window frame began to
take shape in the dimness, so she touched her fingers along the countertop until she
found a candle stub. Lighting it would take a match and there were only five left. But
darkness was a right-now thing.
Swish. She struck the match, lit the candle, and the blackness retreated to the corners.
But shed seen enough of it to know she had to have light, and kerosene cost money. She
opened her mouth in a shallow pant. Maybe I oughta walk to town and turn myself in to
the authorities. At least theyd give me food and send me to school.
But after thinking a minute she said, No, I caint leave the gulls, the heron, the shack.
The marsh is all the family I got.
Sitting in the last of the candlelight, she had an idea.
Earlier than usual, she got up the next morning when the tide was low, pulled on her
overalls, and slipped out with a bucket, claw knife, and empty tow bags. Squatting in
mud, she collected mussels along the sloughs like Ma had taught her, and in four hours of
crouching and kneeling had two croker sacks full.
The slow sun pulled from the sea as she motored through dense fog up to Jumpins
Gas and Bait. He stood as she neared.
Hello, Miss Kya, ya wantin some gas?
She tucked her head. Hadnt spoken a word to anyone since her last trip to the Piggly
Wiggly, and her speech was slipping some. Maybe gas. But that depends. I hear tell you
buy mussels, and I got some here. Can you pay me cash money and some gas throwed
in? She pointed to the bags.
Yessiree, you sho do. They fresh?
I dug em fore dawn. Just now.
Well, then. I can give ya fifty cent for one bag, a full tank for the other.
Kya smiled slightly. Real money she made herself. Thank ya was all she said.
As Jumpin filled the tank, Kya walked into his tiny store there on the wharf. Shed
never paid it much mind because she shopped at the Piggly, but now she saw that
besides bait and tobacco, he sold matches, lard, soap, sardines, Vienna sausages, grits,
soda crackers, toilet paper, and kerosene. About everything she needed in the world was
right here. Lined up on the counter were five one-gallon jars filled with penny candyRed
Hots, jawbreakers, and Sugar Daddys. It seemed like more candy than would be in the
world.
With the mussel money she bought matches, a candle, and grits. Kerosene and soap
would have to wait for another croker full. It took all her might not to buy a Sugar Daddy
instead of the candle.
How many bags you buy a week? she asked.
Well now, we striking up a bidness deal? he asked as he laughed in his particular
waymouth closed, head thrown back. I buy bout forty pounds ever two-three days.
But mind, others bring em in, too. If ya bring em in, and I already got some, well, youd
be out. Its first come, first serve. No other way of doing it.
Okay. Thank you, thatd be fine. Bye, Jumpin. Then she added, Oh, by the way, my
pa sends his regards to ya.
That so, well then. Ya do the same from me, if ya please. Bye yourself, Miss Kya. He
smiled big as she motored away. She almost smiled herself. Buying her own gas and
groceries surely made her a grown-up. Later, at the shack when she unpacked the tiny
pile of supplies, she saw a yellow-and-red surprise at the bottom of the bag. Not too
grown-up for a Sugar Daddy Jumpin had dropped inside.
To stay ahead of the other pickers, Kya slipped down to the marsh by candle or moon
her shadow wavering around on the glistening sandand gathered mussels deep in the
night. She added oysters to her catch and sometimes slept near gullies under the stars to
get to Jumpins by first light. The mussel money turned out to be more reliable than the
Monday money ever had, and she usually managed to beat out other pickers.
She stopped going to the Piggly, where Mrs. Singletary always asked why she wasnt in
school. Sooner or later theyd grab her, drag her in. She got by with her supplies from
Jumpins and had more mussels than she could eat. They werent that bad tossed into the
grits, mashed up beyond recognition. They didnt have eyes to look at her like the fish
did.
12.
Pennies and Grits
1956
For weeks after Pa left, Kya would look up when ravens cawed; maybe theyd seen him
swing-stepping through the woods. At any strange sound in the wind, she cocked her
head, listening for somebody. Anybody. Even a mad dash from the truant lady would be
good sport.
Mostly she looked for the fishing boy. A few times over the years, shed seen him in the
distance, but hadnt spoken to him since she was seven, three years ago when he showed
her the way home through the marsh. He was the only soul she knew in the world
besides Jumpin and a few salesladies. Wherever she glided through the waterways, she
scanned for him.
One morning, as she motored into a cord grass estuary, she saw his boat tucked in the
reeds. Tate wore a different baseball cap and was taller now, but even from more than
fifty yards, she recognized the blond curls. Kya idled down, maneuvered quietly into long
grass, and peered out at him. Working her lips, she thought of cruising over, maybe
asking if he had caught any fish. That seemed to be what Pa and anybody else in the
marsh said when they came across somebody: Anythang bitin? Had any nibbles?
But she only stared, didnt move. She felt a strong pull toward him and a strong push
away, the result being stuck firmly in this spot. Finally, she eased toward home, her heart
pushing against her ribs.
Every time she saw him it was the same: watching him as she did the herons.
She still collected feathers and shells, but left them, salty and sandy, strewn around
the brick-n-board steps. She dallied some of each day while dishes piled up in the sink,
and why wash overalls that got muddied up again? Long ago shed taken to wearing the
old throwaway overalls from gone-away siblings. Her shirts full of holes. She had no more
shoes at all.
One evening Kya slipped the pink-and-green flowery sundress, the one Ma had worn to
church, from the wire hanger. For years now she had fingered this beautythe only dress
Pa didnt burnhad touched the little pink flowers. There was a stain across the front, a
faded brown splotch under the shoulder straps, blood maybe. But it was faint now,
scrubbed out like other bad memories.
Kya pulled the dress over her head, down her thin frame. The hem came almost to her
toes; that wouldnt do. She pulled it off, hung it up to wait for another few years. Itd be a
shame to cut it up, wear it to dig mussels.
A few days later Kya took the boat over to Point Beach, an apron of white sand several
miles south of Jumpins. Time, waves, and winds had modeled it into an elongated tip,
which collected more shells than other beaches, and she had found rare ones there. After
securing her boat at the southern end, she strolled north, searching. Suddenly distant
voicesshrill and exciteddrifted on the air.
Instantly, she ran across the beach toward the woods, where an oak, more than eighty
feet from one side to the other, stood knee-deep in tropical ferns. Hiding behind the tree,
she watched a band of kids strolling down the sand, now and then dashing around in the
waves, kicking up sea spray. One boy ran ahead; another threw a football. Against the
white sand, their bright madras shorts looked like colorful birds and marked the changing
season. Summer was walking toward her down the beach.
As they moved closer, she flattened herself against the oak and peered around. Five
girls and four boys, a bit older than she, maybe twelve. She recognized Chase Andrews
throwing the ball to those boys he was always with.
The girlsTallskinnyblonde, Ponytailfreckleface, Shortblackhair, Alwayswearspearls,
and Roundchubbycheekshung back in a little covey, walking slower, chattering and
giggling. Their voices lifted up to Kya like chimes. She was too young to care much about
the boys; her eyes fixed on the troop of girls. Together they squatted to watch a crab
skittering sideways across the sand. Laughing, they leaned against one anothers
shoulders until they flopped on the sand in a bundle.
Kya bit her bottom lip as she watched. Wondering how it would feel to be among
them. Their joy created an aura almost visible against the deepening sky. Ma had said
women need one another more than they need men, but she never told her how to get
inside the pride. Easily, she slipped deeper into the forest and watched from behind the
giant ferns until the kids wandered back down the beach, until they were little spots on
the sand, the way they came.
  
DAWN SMOLDERED beneath gray clouds as Kya pulled up to Jumpins wharf. He walked out of
the little shop shaking his head.
Im sorry as can be, Miss Kya, he said. But they beatcha to it. I got my weeks quota
of mussels, caint buy no mo.
She cut the engine and the boat banged against a piling. This was the second week
shed been beat out. Her money was gone and she couldnt buy a single thing. Down to
pennies and grits.
Miss Kya, ya gotta find some udder ways to bring cash in. Ya cant git all yo coons up
one tree.
Back at her place, she sat pondering on the brick n boards, and came up with another
idea. She fished for eight hours straight, then soaked her catch of twenty in saltwater
brine through the night. At daybreak she lined them up on the shelves of Pas old
smokehousethe size and shape of an outhousebuilt a fire in the pit, and poked green
sticks into the flames like hed done. Blue-gray smoke billowed and puffed up the
chimney and through every crack in the walls. The whole shack huffing.
The next day she motored to Jumpins and, still standing in her boat, held up her
bucket. In all it was a pitiful display of small bream and carp, falling apart at the seams.
Ya buy smoked fish, Jumpin? I got some here.
Well, I declare, ya sho did, Miss Kya. Tell ya what: Ill take em on consignment like.
If I sell em, ya get the money; if I dont, ya get em back like they is. That do?
Okay, thanks, Jumpin.
  
THAT EVENING Jumpin walked down the sandy track to Colored Towna cluster of shacks
and lean-tos, and even a few real houses squatting about on backwater bogs and mud
sloughs. The scattered encampment was in deep woods, back from the sea, with no
breeze, and more skeeters than the whole state of Jawja.
After about three miles he could smell the smoke from cookfires drifting through the
pines and hear the chatter of some of his grandchillin. There were no roads in Colored
Town, just trails leading off through the woods this way and that to different family
dwellings. His was a real house he and his pa had built with pine lumber and a raw-wood
fence around the hardpan dirt yard, which Mabel, his good-sized wife, swept clean as a
whistle just like a floor. No snake could slink within thirty yards of the steps without being
spotted by her hoe.
She came out of the house to meet him with a smile, as she often did, and he handed
her the pail with Kyas smoked fish.
Whats this? she asked. Looks like sumpm even dogs wouldnt drag in.
Its that girl again. Miss Kya brung em. Sometimes she aint the first one with
mussels, so shes gone to smokin fish. Wants me to sell em.
Lawd, we gotta do something bout that child. Aint nobody gonna buy them fish; I can
cook em up in stew. Our church can come up wif some clothes, other things for her. Well
tell er theres some family thatll trade jumpers for carpies. What size is she?
Ya askin me? Skinny. Alls I know is shes skinny as a tick on a flagpole. I spect shell
be there first thing in the mornin. Shes plumb broke.
  
AFTER EATING A BREAKFAST of warmed-up mussels-in-grits, Kya motored over to Jumpins to
see if any moneyd come in from the smoked fish. In all these years it had just been him
there or customers, but as she approached slowly she saw a large black woman sweeping
the wharf like it was a kitchen floor. Jumpin was sitting in his chair, leaning back against
the store wall doing figures in his ledger. Seeing her, he jumped up, waved.
Gmornin, she called quietly, drifting expertly up to the dock.
Hiya, Miss Kya. Got somebody here for ya to meet. This heres ma wife, Mabel. Mabel
walked up and stood next to Jumpin, so that when Kya stepped onto the wharf, they
were close.
Mabel reached out and took Kyas hand, held it gently in hers, and said, Its mighty
fine to meet ya, Miss Kya. Jumpins told me what a fine girl ya are. One a de best oryster
pickers.
In spite of hoeing her garden, cooking half of every day, and scrubbing and mending
for whites, Mabels hand was supple. Kya kept her fingers in that velvet glove but didnt
know what to say, so stood quiet.
Now, Miss Kya, we got a family wholl trade clothes and other stuff ya need for yo
smoked fish.
Kya nodded. Smiled at her feet. Then asked, What about gas for ma boat?
Mabel turned question eyes at Jumpin.
Well now, he said, Ill give ya some today cause I know youre short. But ya keep
bringin in mussels and such when ya can.
Mabel said in her big voice, Lawd, child, lets dont worry none about the details. Now
let me look atcha. I gotta calculate yo size to tell em. She led her into the tiny shop.
Lets sit right here, and ya tell me what clothes and what-all else ya need.
After they discussed the list, Mabel traced Kyas feet on a piece of brown paper bag,
then said, Well, come back tomorrer and therell be a stack here for ya.
Im much obliged, Mabel. Then, her voice low, said, Theres something else. I found
these old packages of seeds, but I dont know about gardenin.
Well now. Mabel leaned back and laughed deep in her generous bosom. I can sure
do a garden. She went over every step in great detail, then reached into some cans on
the shelf and brought out squash, tomato, and pumpkin seeds. She folded each kind into
some paper and drew a picture of the vegetable on the outside. Kya didnt know if Mabel
did this because she couldnt write or because she knew Kya couldnt read, but it worked
fine for both of them.
She thanked them as she stepped into her boat.
Im glad to help ya, Miss Kya. Now come back tomorrer for yo things, Mabel said.
That very afternoon, Kya started hoeing the rows where Mas garden used to be. The
hoe made clunking sounds as it moved down the rows, releasing earthy smells and
uprooting pinkish worms. Then a different clink sounded, and Kya bent to uncover one of
Mas old metal-and-plastic barrettes. She swiped it gently against her overalls until all the
grit fell clear. As if reflected in the cheap artifact, Mas red mouth and dark eyes were
clearer than theyd been in years. Kya looked around; surely Ma was walking up the lane
even now, come to help turn this earth. Finally home. Such stillness was rare; even the
crows were quiet, and she could hear her own breathing.
Sweeping up bunches of her hair, she pinned the barrette above her left ear. Maybe
Ma was never coming home. Maybe some dreams should just fade away. She lifted the
hoe and clobbered a chunk of hard clay into smithereens.
  
WHEN KYA MOTORED up to Jumpins wharf the next morning, he was alone. Perhaps the
large form of his wife and her fine ideas had been an illusion. But there, sitting on the
wharf, were two boxes of goods that Jumpin was pointing to, a wide grin on his face.
Gmornin, Miss Kya. This heres for ya.
Kya jumped onto the wharf and stared at the overflowing crates.
Go on, then, Jumpin said. Its all yourn.
Gently she pulled out overalls, jeans, and real blouses, not just T-shirts. A pair of navy
blue lace-up Keds and some Buster Brown two-tone saddle shoes, polished brown and
white so many times they glowed. Kya held up a white blouse with a lace collar and a
blue satin bow at the neck. Her mouth opened a little bit.
The other box had matches, grits, a tub of oleo, dried beans, and a whole quart of
homemade lard. On top, wrapped in newspaper, were fresh turnips and greens,
rutabagas, and okra.
Jumpin, she said softly, this is more than those fish woulda cost. This could be a
months fish.
Well now, whata folks gonna do with old clothes layin round the house? If they got
these things extra, and ya need em, and ya got fish, and they need fish, then thats the
deal. Ya gotta take em now, cause I aint got room for that junk round here.
Kya knew that was true. Jumpin had no extra space, so shed be doing him a favor to
take them off his wharf.
Ill take em, then. But you tell em thank you, will you? And Ill smoke more fish and
bring it in soon as I can.
Okay then, Miss Kya. Thatll be fine. Ya bring in fish when ya git em.
Kya chugged back into the sea. Once she rounded the peninsula, out of sight of
Jumpins, she idled down, dug in the box, and pulled out the blouse with the lace collar.
She put it on right over her scratchy bib overalls with patched knees, and tied the little
satin ribbon into a bow at her neck. Then, one hand on the tiller, the other on lace, she
glided across ocean and estuaries toward home.
13.
Feathers
1960
Lanky yet brawny for fourteen, Kya stood on an afternoon beach, flinging crumbs to gulls.
Still couldnt count them; still couldnt read. No longer did she daydream of winging with
eagles; perhaps when you have to paw your supper from mud, imagination flattens to
that of adulthood. Mas sundress fit snugly across her breasts and fell just below her
knees; she reckoned she had caught up, and then some. She walked back to the shack,
got a pole and line, and went straight to fishing from a thicket on the far side of her
lagoon.
Just as she cast, a stick snapped behind her. She jerked her head around, searching. A
footfall in brush. Not a bear, whose large paws squished in debris, but a solid clunk in the
brambles. Then the crows cawed. Crows cant keep secrets any better than mud; once
they see something curious in the forest they have to tell everybody. Those who listen
are rewarded: either warned of predators or alerted to food. Kya knew something was
up.
She pulled in the line, wrapped it around the pole even as she pushed silently through
the brush with her shoulders. Stopped again, listened. A dark clearingone of her
favorite placesspread cavernlike under five oaks so dense only hazy streams of sunlight
filtered through the canopy, striking lush patches of trillium and white violets. Her eyes
scanned the clearing but saw no one.
Then a shape slunk through a thicket beyond, and her eyes swung there. It stopped.
Her heart pumped harder. She hunkered down, stoop-running fast and quiet into the
undergrowth on the edge of the clearing. Looking back through the branches, she saw an
older boy walking fast through the woods, his head moving to and fro. He stopped as he
saw her.
Kya ducked behind a thorn bush, then squeezed into a rabbit run that twisted through
brambles thick as a fort wall. Still bent, she scrambled, scratching her arms on prickly
scrub. Paused again, listening. Hid there in burning heat, her throat racking from thirst.
After ten minutes, no one came, so she crept to a spring that pooled in moss, and drank
like a deer. She wondered who that boy was and why hed come. That was the thing
about going to Jumpinspeople saw her there. Like the underbelly of a porcupine, she
was exposed.
Finally, between dusk and dark, that time when the shadows were unsure, she walked
back toward the shack by way of the oak clearing.
Cause of him sneaking round, I didnt catch any fish ta smoke.
In the center of the clearing was a rotted-down stump, so carpeted in moss it looked
like an old man hiding under a cape. Kya approached it, then stopped. Lodged in the
stump and sticking straight up was a thin black feather about five or six inches long. To
most it would have looked ordinary, maybe a crows wing feather. But she knew it was
extraordinary for it was the eyebrow of a great blue heron, the feather that bows
gracefully above the eye, extending back beyond her elegant head. One of the most
exquisite fragments of the coastal marsh, right here. She had never found one but knew
instantly what it was, having squatted eye to eye with herons all her life.
A great blue heron is the color of gray mist reflecting in blue water. And like mist, she
can fade into the backdrop, all of her disappearing except the concentric circles of her
lock-and-load eyes. She is a patient, solitary hunter, standing alone as long as it takes to
snatch her prey. Or, eyeing her catch, she will stride forward one slow step at a time, like
a predacious bridesmaid. And yet, on rare occasions she hunts on the wing, darting and
diving sharply, swordlike beak in the lead.
Howd it get stuck straight up in the stump? Whispering, Kya looked around. That
boy mustve put it here. He could be watchin me right now. She stood still, heart
pounding again. Backing away, she left the feather and ran to the shack and locked the
screen door, which she seldom did since it offered scant protection.
Yet as soon as dawn crept between the trees, she felt a strong pull toward the feather,
at least to look at it again. At sunrise she ran to the clearing, looked around carefully,
then walked to the stump and lifted the feather. It was sleek, almost velvety. Back at the
shack, she found a special place for it in the center of her collectionfrom tiny
hummingbird feathers to large eagle tailsthat winged across the wall. She wondered
why a boy would bring her a feather.
  
THE NEXT MORNING, Kya wanted to rush to the stump to see if another one had been left,
but she made herself wait. She must not run into the boy. Finally, in late morning she
walked to the clearing, approaching slowly, listening. She didnt hear or see anybody, so
she stepped forward, and a rare, brief smile lit her face when she saw a thin white
feather stuck into the top of the stump. It reached from her fingertips to her elbow, and
curved gracefully to a slender point. She lifted it and laughed out loud. A magnificent tail
feather of a tropicbird. Shed never seen these seabirds because they didnt occur in this
region, but on rare occasions they were blown over land on hurricane wings.
Kyas heart filled with wonder that someone had such a collection of rare feathers that
he could spare this one.
Since she couldnt read Mas old guidebook, she didnt know the names for most of the
birds or insects, so made up her own. And even though she couldnt write, Kya had found
a way to label her specimens. Her talent had matured and now she could draw, paint,
and sketch anything. Using chalks or watercolors from the Five and Dime, she sketched
the birds, insects, or shells on grocery bags and attached them to her samples.
That night she splurged and lit two candles and set them in saucers on the kitchen
table so she could see all the colors of the white; so she could paint the tropicbird
feather.
  
FOR MORE THAN A WEEK there was no feather on the stump. Kya went by several times a day,
cautiously peeping through ferns, but saw nothing. She sat in the cabin in midday,
something she rarely did.
Shoulda soaked beans for supper. Now its too late. She walked through the kitchen,
rummaging through the cupboard, drumming her fingers on the table. Thought of
painting, but didnt. Walked again to the stump.
Even from some distance she could see a long, striped tail feather of a wild turkey. It
caught her up. Turkeys had been one of her favorites. Shed watched as many as twelve
chicks tuck themselves under the mothers wings even as the hen walked along, a few
tumbling out of the back, then scrambling to catch up.
But about a year ago, as Kya strolled through a stand of pines, shed heard a highpitched
shriek. A flock of fifteen wild turkeysmostly hens, a few toms and jakesrushed
about, pecking what looked like an oily rag crumpled in the dirt. Dust stirred from their
feet and shrouded the woods, drifting up through branches, caught there. As Kya had
crept closer, she saw it was a hen turkey on the ground, and the birds of her own flock
were pecking and toe-scratching her neck and head. Somehow shed managed to get her
wings so tangled with briars, her feathers stuck out at strange angles and she could no
longer fly. Jodie had said that if a bird becomes different from the othersdisfigured or
woundedit is more likely to attract a predator, so the rest of the flock will kill it, which is
better than drawing in an eagle, who might take one of them in the bargain.
A large female clawed at the bedraggled hen with her large, horny feet, then pinned
her to the ground as another female jabbed at her naked neck and head. The hen
squealed, looked around with wild eyes at her own flock assaulting her.
Kya ran into the clearing, throwing her arms around. Hey, what ya doing? Git outta
here. Stop it! The flurry of wings kicked up more dust as the turkeys scattered into
brush, two of them flying heavy into an oak. But Kya was too late. The hen, her eyes
wide open, lay limp. Blood ran from her wrinkled neck, bent crooked on the dirt.
Shoo, go on! Kya chased the last of the large birds until they shuffled away, their
business complete. She knelt next to the dead hen and covered the birds eye with a
sycamore leaf.
That night after watching the turkeys, she ate a supper of leftover cornbread and
beans, then lay on her porch bed, watching the moon touch the lagoon. Suddenly, she
heard voices in the woods coming toward the shack. They sounded nervous, squeaky.
Boys, not men. She sat straight up. There was no back door. It was get out now or still be
sitting on the bed when they came. Quick as a mouse, she slipped to the door, but just
then candles appeared, moving up and down, their light jiggling in halos. Too late to run.
The voices got louder. Here we come, Marsh Girl!
Heyya in thar? Miss Missin Link!
Show us yo teeth! Show us yo swamp grass! Peals of laughter.
She ducked lower behind the half wall of the porch as the footsteps moved closer. The
flames flickered madly, then went out altogether as five boys, maybe thirteen or fourteen
years old, ran across the yard. All talking stopped as they galloped full speed to the porch
and tagged the door with their palms, making slapping sounds.
Every smack a stab in the turkey hens heart.
Against the wall, Kya wanted to whimper but held her breath. They could break
through the door easy. One hard yank, and theyd be in.
But they backed down the steps, ran into the trees again, hooting and hollering with
relief that they had survived the Marsh Girl, the Wolf Child, the girl who couldnt spell dog.
Their words and laughter carried back to her through the forest as they disappeared into
the night, back to safety. She watched the relit candles, bobbing through the trees. Then
sat staring into the stone-quiet darkness. Shamed.
Kya thought of that day and night whenever she saw wild turkeys, but she was thrilled
to see the tail feather on the stump. Just to know the game was still on.
14.
Red Fibers
1969
Muggy heat blurred the morning into a haze of no sea, no sky. Joe walked out of the
sheriffs building and met Ed getting out of the patrol truck. Cmon over here, Sheriff. Got
more from the lab on the Chase Andrews case. Hot as a boars breath inside. He led the
way to a large oak, its ancient roots punching through the bare dirt like fists. The sheriff
followed, crunching acorns, and they stood in the shade, faces to the sea breeze.
He read out loud. Bruising on the body, interior injuries, consistent with an extensive
fall. He did bang the back of his head on that beamthe blood and hair samples
matched hiswhich caused severe bruising and damage to the posterior lobe but didnt
kill him.
There you have it; he died where we found him, had not been moved. The blood and
hair on the crossbeam prove it. Cause of death: sudden impact on occipital and parietal
lobe of the posterior cerebral cortex, severed spinefrom falling off the tower.
So somebody did destroy all the foot- and fingerprints. Anything else?
Listen to this. They found lots of foreign fibers on his jacket. Red wool fibers that
didnt come from any of his clothes. Sample included. The sheriff shook a small plastic
bag.
Both men peered at the fuzzy red threads flattened against the plastic like spider
webbing.
Wool, it says. Could be a sweater, scarf, hat, Joe said.
Shirt, skirt, socks, cape. Hell, it could be anything. And we have to find it.
15.
The Game
1960
The next noon, hands on her cheeks, Kya approached the stump slowly, almost in prayer.
But no feather on the stump. Her lips pinched.
A course. I gotta leave something for him.
Her pocket brought a tail feather from an immature bald eagle shed found that
morning. Only someone who knew birds well would know this splotchy, tatty feather was
eagle. A three-year-old, not yet crowned. Not as precious as the tail feather of the
tropicbird, but still a dear thing. She laid it carefully on the stump with a little rock on top,
pinned from the wind.
That night, arms folded under her head, she lay on her porch bed, a slight smile on her
face. Her family had abandoned her to survive a swamp, but here was someone who
came on his own, leaving gifts for her in the forest. Uncertainty lingered, but the more
she thought about it, the less likely it seemed the boy meant her harm. It didnt fit that
anyone who liked birds would be mean.
The next morning, she sprang from bed and went about doing what Ma had called a
deep clean. At Mas dresser, Kya meant only to cull the remnants of the drawers, but as
she picked up her mothers brass-and-steel scissorsthe finger holes curled and shaped
with intricate patterns of liliesshe suddenly pulled back her hair, not trimmed since Ma
left more than seven years ago, and cut off eight inches. Now it fell just below her
shoulders. She looked at herself in the mirror, tossed her head a bit, smiled. Scrubbed her
fingernails and brushed her hair till it shone.
Replacing the brush and scissors, she looked down among some of Mas old cosmetics.
The liquid foundation and rouge had dried and cracked, but the shelf life of lipstick must
be decades because when she opened a tube, it looked fresh. For the first time, never
having played dress-up as a little girl, she put some on her lips. Smacked, then smiled
again in the mirror. Thought she looked a bit pretty. Not like Ma, but pleasing enough.
She giggled, then wiped it off. Just before closing the drawer, she saw a bottle of driedup
Revlon fingernail polishBarely Pink.
Kya lifted the little jar, remembering how Ma had walked back from town one day with
this bottle of fingernail polish, of all things. Ma said it would look real good with their
olive skin. She lined up Kya and her two older sisters in a row on the faded sofa, told
them to stick out their bare feet, and painted all those toes and then their fingernails.
Then she did her own, and they laughed and had a fine time flouncing around the yard,
flashing their pink nails. Pa was off somewhere, but the boat was moored at the lagoon.
Ma came up with the idea of all the girls going out in the boat, something they had never
done.
They climbed into the old skiff, still cavorting like they were tipsy. It took a few pulls to
get the outboard cranked, but finally it jumped to, and off they went, Ma steering across
the lagoon and into the narrow channel that led to the marsh. They breezed along the
waterways, but Ma didnt know all that much about it, and when they went into a shallow
lagoon, they got stuck in gummy black mud, thick as tar. They poled this way and that
but couldnt budge. There was nothing left to do but climb over the side, skirts and all,
sinking in the muck up to their knees.
Ma hollering, Now dont turn it over, girls, dont turn it over, they hauled on the boat
until it was free, squealing at one anothers muddy faces. It took some doing to get back
in, flopping over the side like so many landed fish. And, instead of sitting on the seats,
the four of them squinched up on the bottom of the boat all in a line, holding their feet to
the sky, wiggling their toes, their pink nails gleaming through the mud.
Lying there Ma said, You all listen now, this is a real lesson in life. Yes, we got stuck,
but whatd we girls do? We made it fun, we laughed. Thats what sisters and girlfriends
are all about. Sticking together even in the mud, specially in mud.
Ma hadnt bought any polish remover, so when it began to peel and chip, they had
faded, patchy pink nails on all their fingers and toes, reminding them of the good time
theyd had, and that real-life lesson.
Looking at the old bottle, Kya tried to see her sisters faces. And said out loud,
Wherere you now, Ma? Why didnt you stick?
  
AS SOON AS SHE REACHED the oak clearing the next afternoon, Kya saw bright, unnatural
colors against the muted greens and browns of the forest. On the stump was a small redand-
white milk carton and next to it another feather. It seemed the boy had upped the
ante. She walked over and picked up the feather first.
Silver and soft, it was from the crest of a night heron, one of the most beautiful of the
marsh. Then she looked inside the milk carton. Rolled up tight were some packages of
seedsturnips, carrots, and green beansand, at the bottom of the carton, wrapped in
brown paper, a spark plug for her boat engine. She smiled again and turned a little circle.
She had learned how to live without most things, but now and then she needed a spark
plug. Jumpin had taught her a few minor engine repairs, but every part meant a walk to
town and cash money.
And yet here was an extra spark plug, to be set aside until needed. A surplus. Her
heart filled up. The same feeling as having a full tank of gas or seeing the sunset under a
paint-brushed sky. She stood absolutely still, trying to take it in, what it meant. She had
watched male birds wooing females by bringing them gifts. But she was pretty young for
nesting.
At the bottom of the carton was a note. She unfolded it and looked at the words,
written carefully in simple script that a child could read. Kya knew the time of the tides in
her heart, could find her way home by the stars, knew every feather of an eagle, but
even at fourteen, couldnt read these words.
She had forgotten to bring anything to leave. Her pockets yielded only ordinary
feathers, shells, and seedpods, so she hurried back to the shack and stood in front of her
feather-wall, window-shopping. The most graceful were the tail feathers from a tundra
swan. She took one from the wall to leave at the stump next time she passed.
As evening fell, she took her blanket and slept in the marsh, close to a gully full of
moon and mussels, and had two tow bags filled by dawn. Gas money. They were too
heavy to tote, so she dragged the first one back toward the lagoon. Even though it wasnt
the shortest route, she went by way of the oak clearing to leave the swan feather. She
walked into the trees without looking, and there, leaning against the stump, was the
feather boy. She recognized him as Tate, who had shown her the way home through the
marsh when she was a little girl. Tate, who, for years, she had watched from a distance
without the courage to go near. Of course, he was taller and older, probably eighteen. His
golden hair stuck out from his cap in all manner of curls and loose bits, and his face was
tan, pleasing. He was calm, smiled wide, his whole face beaming. But it was his eyes that
caught her up; they were golden brown with flecks of green, and fixed on hers the way
heron eyes catch a minnow.
She halted, shaken by the sudden break in the unwritten rules. That was the fun of it,
a game where they didnt have to talk or even be seen. Heat rose in her face.
Hey, Kya. Please . . . dont . . . run. Its . . . just me . . . Tate, he said very quietly,
slowly, like she was dumb or something. That was probably what the townspeople said of
her, that she barely spoke human.
Tate couldnt help staring. She must be thirteen or fourteen, he thought. But even at
that age, she had the most striking face hed ever seen. Her large eyes nearly black, her
nose slender over shapely lips, painted her in an exotic light. She was tall, thin, giving her
a fragile, lithesome look as though molded wild by the wind. Yet young, strapping
muscles showed through with quiet power.
Her impulse, as always, was to run. But there was another sensation. A fullness she
hadnt felt for years. As if something warm had been poured inside her heart. She thought
of the feathers, the spark plug, and the seeds. All of it might end if she ran. Without
speaking, she lifted her hand and held the elegant swan feather toward him. Slowly, as
though she might spring like a startled fawn, he walked over and studied it in her hand.
She watched in silence, looking only at the feather, not his face, nowhere near his eyes.
Tundra swan, right? Incredible, Kya. Thank you, he said. He was much taller and
bent slightly as he took it from her. Of course, this was the time for her to thank him for
his gifts, but she stood silent, wishing he would go, wishing they could stick to their
game.
Trying to fill the silence, he continued. My dads the one who taught me birds.
Finally she looked up at him and said, I cant read yo note.
Well, sure, since you dont go to school. I forgot. All it said was, I saw you a couple of
times when I was fishing, and it got me thinking that maybe you could use the seeds and
the spark plug. I had extra and thought it might save you a trip to town. I figured youd
like the feathers.
Kya hung her head and said, Thank you for them; that was mighty fine of you.
Tate noticed that while her face and body showed early inklings and foothills of
womanhood, her mannerisms and turns of phrase were somewhat childlike, in contrast to
the village girls whose mannerismsoverdoing their makeup, cussing, and smoking
outranked their foothills.
Youre welcome. Well, I better be going, getting late. Ill drop by now and then, if
thats okay.
Kya didnt say a word to that. The game must be over. As soon as he realized she
wasnt going to speak again, he nodded to her, touched his hat, and turned to go. But
just as he ducked his head to step into the brambles, he looked back at her.
You know, I could teach you to read.
16.
Reading
1960
For days, Tate didnt return for the reading lessons. Before the feather game, loneliness
had become a natural appendage to Kya, like an arm. Now it grew roots inside her and
pressed against her chest.
Late one afternoon, she struck out in her boat. I caint just sit round waitin.
Instead of docking at Jumpins, where shed be seen, she stashed her rig in a small
cove just south and, carrying a croker sack, walked down the shaded path toward Colored
Town. A soft rain had fallen most of the day, and now as the sun neared the horizon, the
forest formed its own fog that drifted through succulent glades. Shed never gone to
Colored Town, but knew where it was and figured she could find Jumpin and Mabels
place once she got there.
She wore jeans and a pink blouse from Mabel. In the croker sack were two pint jars of
real runny blackberry jam shed made herself to return Jumpin and Mabels kindness. A
need to be with someone, a chance to talk with a woman friend urged her toward them.
If Jumpin wasnt home yet, maybe she could sit down with Mabel and visit a spell.
Then, nearing a bend in the road, Kya heard voices coming toward her. She stopped,
listened carefully. Quickly she stepped off the path into the woods and hid behind a
myrtle thicket. A minute later, two white boys, dressed in raggedy bib overalls, came
around the bend, toting fishing tackle and a string of catfish long as her arm. She froze
behind the thicket and waited.
One of the boys pointed down the lane. Lookee up thar.
Aint we lucky. Here comes a nigger walkin to Nigger Town. Kya looked down the
path, and there, walking home for the evening, was Jumpin. Quite close, he had surely
heard the boys, but he simply dropped his head, stepped into the woods to give them a
berth, and moved on.
Whats the matter with im, why dont he do sumpm? Kya raged to herself. She knew
nigger was a real bad wordshe knew by the way Pa had used it like a cussword. Jumpin
could have knocked the boys heads together, taught them a lesson. But he walked on
fast.
Jest an ol nigger walkin to town. Watch out, nigger-boy, dont fall down, they
taunted Jumpin, who kept his eyes on his toes. One of the boys reached down, picked up
a stone, and slung it at Jumpins back. It hit just under his shoulder blade with a thud. He
lurched over a bit, kept walking. The boys laughed as he disappeared around the bend,
then they picked up more rocks and followed him.
Kya stalked through brush until she was ahead of them, her eyes glued on their caps
bobbing above the branches. She crouched at a spot where thick bushes grew next to the
lane, where in seconds they would pass within a foot of her. Jumpin was up ahead, out of
sight. She twisted the cloth bag with the jam so that it was wrung tight and knotted
against the jars. As the boys drew even with the thicket, she swung the heavy bag and
whacked the closest one hard across the back of his head. He pitched forward and fell on
his face. Hollering and screeching, she rushed the other boy, ready to bash his head too,
but he took off. She slipped about fifty yards into the trees and watched until the first boy
stood, holding his head and cussing.
Toting the bag of jam jars, she turned back toward her boat and motored home.
Thought shed probably never go viztin again.
  
THE NEXT DAY, when the sound of Tates motor chugged through the channel, Kya ran to
the lagoon and stood in the bushes, watching him step out of his boat, holding a
rucksack. Looking around, he called out to her, and she stepped slowly forward dressed in
jeans that fit and a white blouse with mismatched buttons.
Hey, Kya. Sorry I couldnt get here sooner. Had to help my dad, but well get you
reading in no time.
Hey, Tate.
Lets sit here. He pointed to an oak knee in deep shade of the lagoon. From the
rucksack he pulled out a thin, faded book of the alphabet and a lined writing pad. With a
careful slow hand, he formed the letters between the lines, a A, b B, asking her to do the
same, patient with her tongue-between-lips effort. As she wrote, he said the letters out
loud. Softly, slowly.
She remembered some of the letters from Jodie and Ma but didnt know much at all
about putting them into proper words.
After only minutes, he said, See, you can already write a word.
What dya mean?
C-a-b. You can write the word cab.
Whats cab? she asked. He knew not to laugh.
Dont worry if you dont know it. Lets keep going. Soon youll write a word you know.
Later he said, Youll have to work lots more on the alphabet. Itll take a little while to
get it, but you can already read a bit. Ill show you. He didnt have a grammar reader, so
her first book was his dads copy of Aldo Leopolds A Sand County Almanac. He pointed to
the opening sentence and asked her to read it back to him. The first word was There and
she had to go back to the alphabet and practice the sound of each letter, but he was
patient, explaining the special sound of th, and when she finally said it, she threw her
arms up and laughed. Beaming, he watched her.
Slowly, she unraveled each word of the sentence: There are some who can live
without wild things, and some who cannot.
Oh, she said. Oh.
You can read, Kya. There will never be a time again when you cant read.
It aint just that. She spoke almost in a whisper. I wadnt aware that words could
hold so much. I didnt know a sentence could be so full.
He smiled. Thats a very good sentence. Not all words hold that much.
  
OVER THE COMING DAYS, sitting on the oak knee in shade or the shore in sun, Tate taught her
how to read the words, which sang of the geese and cranes, real all around them. What
if there be no more goose music?
In between helping his dad or pitching baseball with his friends, he came to Kyas
place several times a week and, now, no matter what she was doingweeding the
garden, feeding the chickens, searching for shellsshe listened for the sound of his boat
humming up the channel.
On the beach one day, reading about what chickadees eat for lunch, she asked him,
You live with yo family in Barkley Cove?
I live with my dad. Yes, in Barkley.
Kya didnt ask if he had more family, now gone. His ma must have left him, too. Part of
her longed to touch his hand, a strange wanting, but her fingers wouldnt do it. Instead
she memorized the bluish veins on the inside of his wrist, as intricate as those sketched
on the wings of wasps.
  
AT NIGHT, sitting at the kitchen table, she went over the lessons by kerosene lamp, its soft
light seeping through the shack windows and touching the lower branches of the oaks.
The only light for miles and miles of blackness except for the soft glow of fireflies.
Carefully, she wrote and said each word over and over. Tate said long words were
simply little ones strung togetherso she wasnt afraid of them, went straight to learning
Pleistocene along with sat. Learning to read was the most fun shed ever had. But she
couldnt figure why Tate had offered to teach po white trash like her, why hed come in
the first place, bringing exquisite feathers. But she didnt ask, afraid it might get him
thinking on it, send him away.
Now at last Kya could label all her precious specimens. She took each feather, insect,
shell, or flower, looked up how to spell the name in Mas books, and wrote it carefully on
her brown-paper-bag painting.
  
WHAT COMES AFTER TWENTY-NINE? she asked Tate one day.
He looked at her. She knew more about tides and snow geese, eagles and stars than
most ever would, yet she couldnt count to thirty. He didnt want to shame her, so didnt
show surprise. She was awfully good at reading eyes.
Thirty, he said simply. Here, Ill show you the numbers and well do some basic
arithmetic. Its easy. Ill bring you some books about it.
She went around reading everythingthe directions on the grits bag, Tates notes, and
the stories from her fairy-tale books she had pretended to read for years. Then one night
she made a little oh sound, and took the old Bible from the shelf. Sitting at the table, she
turned the thin pages carefully to the one with the family names. She found her own at
the very bottom. There it was, her birthday: Miss Catherine Danielle Clark, October 10,
1945. Then, going back up the list, she read the real names of her brothers and sisters:
Master Jeremy Andrew Clark, January 2, 1939. Jeremy, she said out loud. Jodie, I
sure never thought a you as Master Jeremy.
Miss Amanda Margaret Clark, May 17, 1937. Kya touched the name with her fingers.
Repeated it several times.
She read on. Master Napier Murphy Clark, April 4, 1936. Kya spoke softly, Murph, ya
name was Napier.
At the top, the oldest, Miss Mary Helen Clark, September 19, 1934. She rubbed her
fingers over the names again, which brought faces before her eyes. They blurred, but she
could see them all squeezed around the table eating stew, passing cornbread, even
laughing some. She was ashamed that she had forgotten their names, but now that shed
found them, she would never let them go again.
Above the list of children she read: Mister Jackson Henry Clark married Miss Julienne
Maria Jacques, June 12, 1933. Not until that moment had she known her parents proper
names.
She sat there for a few minutes with the Bible open on the table. Her family before
her.Time ensures children never know their parents young. Kya would never see the
handsome Jake swagger into an Asheville soda fountain in early 1930, where he spotted
Maria Jacques, a beauty with black curls and red lips, visiting from New Orleans. Over a
milkshake he told her his family owned a plantation and that after high school hed study
to be a lawyer and live in a columned mansion.
But when the Depression deepened, the bank auctioned the land out from under the
Clarks feet, and his father took Jake from school. They moved down the road to a small
pine cabin that once, not so long ago really, had been occupied by slaves. Jake worked
the tobacco fields, stacking leaves with black men and women, babies strapped on their
backs with colorful shawls.
One night two years later, without saying good-bye, Jake left before dawn, taking with
him as many fine clothes and family treasuresincluding his great-grandfathers gold
pocket watch and his grandmothers diamond ringas he could carry. He hitchhiked to
New Orleans and found Maria living with her family in an elegant home near the
waterfront. They were descendants of a French merchant, owners of a shoe factory.
Jake pawned the heirlooms and entertained her in fine restaurants hung with red
velvet curtains, telling her that he would buy her that columned mansion. As he knelt
under a magnolia tree, she agreed to marry him, and they wed in 1933 in a small church
ceremony, her family standing silent.
By now, the money was gone, so he accepted a job from his father-in-law in the shoe
factory. Jake assumed he would be made manager, but Mr. Jacques, a man not easily
taken in, insisted Jake learn the business from the bottom up like any other employee. So
Jake labored at cutting out soles.
He and Maria lived in a small garage apartment furnished with a few grand pieces from
her dowry mixed with flea-market tables and chairs. He enrolled in night classes to finish
high school but usually skipped out to play poker and, stinking of whiskey, came home
late to his new wife. After only three weeks, the teacher dropped him from the classes.
Maria begged him to stop drinking, to show enthusiasm for his job so that her father
would promote him. But the babies started coming and the drinking never stopped.
Between 1934 and 1940 they had four children, and Jake was promoted only once.
The war with Germany was an equalizer. Boiled down to the same uniform-hue as
everyone else, he could hide his shame, once again play proud. But one night, sitting in a
muddy foxhole in France, someone shouted that their sergeant was shot and sprawled
bleeding twenty yards away. Mere boys, they should have been sitting in a dugout
waiting to bat, nervous about some fastball. Still, they jumped at once, scrambling to
save the wounded manall but one.
Jake hunched in a corner, too scared to move, but a mortar exploded yellow-white just
beyond the hole, shattering the bones of his left leg into fragments. When the soldiers
tumbled back into the trench, dragging the sergeant, they assumed Jake had been hit
while helping the others rescue their comrade. He was declared a hero. No one would
ever know. Except Jake.
With a medal and a medical discharge, he was sent home. Determined not to work
again in the shoe factory, Jake stayed only a few nights in New Orleans. With Maria
standing by silently, he sold all her fine furniture and silver, then packed his family onto
the train and moved them to North Carolina. He discovered from an old friend that his
mother and father had died, clearing the way for his plan.
Hed convinced Maria that living in a cabin his father had built as a fishing retreat on
the coast of North Carolina would be a new start. There would be no rent and Jake could
finish high school. He bought a small fishing boat in Barkley Cove and motored through
miles of marsh waterways with his family and all their possessions piled around thema
few fine hatboxes perched on top. When they finally broke into the lagoon, where the
ratty shack with rusted-out screens hunkered under the oaks, Maria clutched her
youngest child, Jodie, fighting tears.
Pa assured her, Dont ya worry none. Ill get this fixed up in no time.
But Jake never improved the shack or finished high school. Soon after they arrived, he
took up drinking and poker at the Swamp Guinea, trying to leave that foxhole in a shot
glass.
Maria did what she could to make a home. She bought sheets from rummage sales for
the floor mattresses and a stand-alone tin bathtub; she washed the laundry under the
yard spigot, and figured out on her own how to plant a garden, how to keep chickens.
Soon after they arrived, dressed in their best, she hiked the children to Barkley Cove to
register them in school. Jake, however, scoffed at the notion of education, and more days
than not, told Murph and Jodie to skip school and bring in squirrels or fish for supper.
Jake took Maria for only one moonlit boat ride, the result of which was their last child,
a daughter named Catherine Danielle; later nicknamed Kya because, when first asked,
thats what she said her name was.
Now and then, when sober, Jake dreamed again of completing school, making a better
life for them all, but the shadow of the foxhole would move across his mind. Once sure
and cocky, handsome and fit, he could no longer wear the man he had become and hed
take a swig from his poke. Blending in with the fighting, drinking, cussing renegades of
the marsh was the easiest thing Jake ever did.
17.
Crossing the Threshold
1960
One day during the reading summer when she motored to Jumpins, he said, Now, Miss
Kya, theres sumpm else. Some men been pokin round, askin bout ya.
She looked right at him instead of off to the side. Who, what dthey want?
I blieve theyre from the Sochul Services. They askin all kinds of questions. Is yo pa
still round, where ya ma is, if ya goin to school this fall. An when ya come here; they
specially wanta know what times ya come here.
Whatd you tell em, Jumpin?
Well, I done ma best to put em off ya. Told em ya pa just fine, out fishins all. He
laughed, threw his head back. Then I told em I neva know when ya boat in here. Now,
dont ya worry none, Miss Kya. Jumpinll send em on a snipe hunt if they come again.
Thank ya. After filling her tank, Kya headed straight home. Shed have to be on
guard more now, maybe find a place in the marsh where she could hide out some until
they gave up on her.
Late that afternoon, as Tate pulled up to the shore, the hull crunching softly on sand,
she said, Can we meet somewheres else, sides here?
Hey, Kya, good to see you. Tate greeted her, still sitting at the tiller.
What dya think?
Its besides, not sides, and its polite to greet people before asking a favor.
You say sides sometimes, she said, almost smiling.
Yeah, we all got magnolia mouth, being from the North Carolina sticks, but we have
to try.
Good afternoon, Mr. Tate, she said, making a little curtsy. He caught a glimpse of the
spunk and sass somewhere inside. Now, can we meet somewhere besides here? Please.
Sure, I guess, but why?
Jumpin said the Social Services are lookin for me. Im scared theyll pull me in like a
trout, put me in a foster home or sumpm.
Well, we better hide way out there where the crawdads sing. I pity any foster parents
who take you on. Tates whole face smiled.
What dya mean, where the crawdads sing? Ma used to say that. Kya remembered
Ma always encouraging her to explore the marsh: Go as far as you canway out yonder
where the crawdads sing.
Just means far in the bush where critters are wild, still behaving like critters. Now, you
got any ideas where we can meet?
Theres a place I found one time, an old fallin-down cabin. Once you know the turnoff,
ya can get there by boat; I can walk there from here.
Okay then, get in. Show me this time; next time well meet there.
If Im out there Ill leave a little pile of rocks right here by the tyin-up log. Kya
pointed to a spot on the lagoon beach. Otherwise, Im round here somewhere and will
come out when I hear yo motor.
They puttered slowly through the marsh, then planed off south through open sea,
away from town. She bounced along in the bow, wind-tears streaming across her cheeks
and tickling cool in her ears. When they reached a small cove, she guided him up a
narrow freshwater creek hung low with brambles. Several times the creek seemed to
peter out, but Kya motioned that it was okay to go on, and they crashed through more
brush.
Finally they broke into a wide meadow where the stream ran by an old one-room log
cabin, collapsed on one end. The logs had buckled, some lying around the ground like
pick-up sticks. The roof, still sitting on the half wall, sloped down from high end to low
like a lopsided hat. Tate pulled the boat up onto the mud and they silently walked to the
open door.
Inside was dark and reeked of rat urine. Well, I hope you dont plan on living here
the whole thing could collapse on your head. Tate pushed at the wall. It seemed sturdy
enough.
Its just a hideout. I can stash some food case I have to go on the run awhile.
Tate turned and looked at her as their eyes adjusted to the dark.
Kya, you ever thought of just going back to school? It wouldnt kill you, and they
might leave you alone if you did.
They mustve figured out Im alone, and if I go, theyll grab me, put me in a home.
Anyway, Im too old for school now. Where would they put me, first grade? Her eyes
widened at the notion of sitting in a tiny chair, surrounded by little kids who could
pronounce words, count to fifty.
What, so you plan to live alone in the marsh forever?
Better than going to a foster home. Pa used to say hed farm us out to one if we were
bad. Told us theyre mean.
No, theyre not. Not always. Most of them are nice people who like kids, he said.
You sayin youd go to a foster home fore youd live in the marsh? she asked, chin
jutted out, hand on her hip.
He was silent a minute. Well, bring some blankets out, matches in case it gets cold.
Maybe some tins of sardines. They last forever. But dont keep fresh food; itll bring the
bears in.
I aint scared of bears.
Im not scared of bears.
  
FOR THE REST of the summer Kya and Tate did the reading lessons at the tumbledown
cabin. By mid-August they had read through A Sand County Almanac, and although she
couldnt read every word, she got most of it. Aldo Leopold taught her that floodplains are
living extensions of the rivers, which will claim them back any time they choose. Anyone
living on a floodplain is just waiting in the rivers wings. She learned where the geese go
in winter, and the meaning of their music. His soft words, sounding almost like poetry,
taught her that soil is packed with life and one of the most precious riches on Earth; that
draining wetlands dries the land for miles beyond, killing plants and animals along with
the water. Some of the seeds lie dormant in the desiccated earth for decades, waiting,
and when the water finally comes home again, they burst through the soil, unfolding their
faces. Wonders and real-life knowledge she wouldve never learned in school. Truths
everyone should know, yet somehow, even though they lay exposed all around, seemed
to lie in secret like the seeds.
They met at the log cabin several times a week, but she slept most nights in her shack
or on the beach with the gulls. She had to collect firewood before winter, so made a
mission of it, toting loads from near and far and stacking them somewhat neatly between
two pines. The turnips in her garden barely poked their heads above the goldenrod; still
she had more vegetables than she and the deer could eat. She harvested the last of the
late-summer crop and stored the squash and beets in the cool shade of the brick-n-board
steps.
But all the while, she kept her ears out for the lugging sounds of an automobile, filled
with men come to take her away. Sometimes the listening was tiresome and creepy, so
shed walk to the log cabin and sleep the night on the dirt floor, wrapped in her spare
blanket. She timed her mussel collecting and fish smoking so that Tate could take them
to Jumpins and bring back her supplies. Keeping her underbelly less exposed.
  
REMEMBER WHEN YOU READ your first sentence, you said that some words hold a lot? Tate
said one day, sitting on the creek bank.
Yeah, I remember, why?
Well, especially poems. The words in poems do more than say things. They stir up
emotions. Even make you laugh.
Ma used to read poems, but I dont remember any.
Listen to this; its by Edward Lear. He took out a folded envelope and read,
Then Mr. Daddy Long-legs
And Mr. Floppy Fly
Rushed downward to the foamy sea
With one sponge-taneous cry;
And there they found a little boat,
Whose sails were pink and gray;
And off they sailed among the waves,
Far, and far away.
Smiling, she said, It makes a rhythm like waves hitting the beach.
After that she went into a poem-writing phase, making them up as she boated through
the marsh or looked for shellssimple verses, singsong and silly. Theres a mama blue
jay lifting from a branch; Id fly too, if I had a chance. They made her laugh out loud;
filled up a few lonely minutes of a long, lonely day.
One late afternoon, reading at the kitchen table, she remembered Mas book of poetry
and scrounged until she found it. The volume so worn, the covers had long since gone,
the pages held together by two frayed rubber bands. Kya carefully took them off and
thumbed through the pages, reading Mas notes in the margins. At the end was a list of
page numbers of Mas favorites.
Kya turned to one by James Wright:
Suddenly lost and cold,
I knew the yard lay bare,
I longed to touch and hold
My child, my talking child,
Laughing or tame or wild . . .
Trees and the sun were gone,
Everything gone but us.
His mother sang in the house,
And kept our supper warm,
And loved us, God knows how,
The wide earth darkened so.
And this one by Galway Kinnell.
I did care. . . .
I did say everything I thought
In the mildest words I knew. And now, . . .
I have to say I am relieved it is over:
At the end I could feel only pity
For that urge toward more life.
. . . Goodbye.
Kya touched the words as if they were a message, as though Ma had underlined them
specifically so her daughter would read them someday by this dim kerosene flame and
understand. It wasnt much, not a handwritten note tucked in the back of a sock drawer,
but it was something. She sensed that the words clinched a powerful meaning, but she
couldnt shake it free. If she ever became a poet, shed make the message clear.
  
AFTER TATE STARTED his senior year in September, he couldnt come to Kyas place as often,
but when he did, he brought her discarded textbooks from school. He didnt say a word
about the biology books being too advanced for her, so she plowed through chapters she
wouldnt have seen for four years in school. Dont worry, hed say, youll get a little
more every time you read it. And that was true.
As the days grew shorter, again they met near her shack because there wasnt enough
daylight to get to the reading cabin. They had always studied outside, but when a crazed
wind blew one morning, Kya built up the fire in the woodstove. No one had crossed the
shacks threshold since Pa disappeared more than four years ago, and to ask anybody
inside would seem unthinkable. Anyone but Tate.
Wanta sit in the kitchen by the stove? she said when he dragged his rig onto the
lagoon shore.
Sure, he said, knowing not to make a big deal of the invitation.
As soon as he stepped inside the porch, he took nearly twenty minutes to explore and
exclaim over her feathers and shells and bones and nests. When they finally settled at
the table, she pulled her chair close to his, their arms and elbows nearly touching. Just to
feel him near.
With Tate so busy helping his dad, the days dragged slow from nose to tail. Late one
evening she took her first novel, Rebecca by Daphne du Maurier, from Mas bookshelf and
read about love. After a while she closed the book and walked to the closet. She slipped
on Mas sundress and swished around the room, flipping the skirt about, whirling in front
of the mirror. Her mane and hips swaying, she imagined Tate asking her to dance. His
hand on her waist. As if she were Mrs. de Winter.
Abruptly she caught herself and bent over, giggling. Then stood very still.
  
COME ON UP HERE, CHILD, Mabel sang out one afternoon. I got ya some things. Jumpin
usually brought the boxes of goods for Kya, but when Mabel showed up, there was
usually something special.
Go on then, pick up yo stuff. Ill fill yo tank, Jumpin said, so Kya hopped onto the
wharf.
Look here, Miss Kya, Mabel said, as she lifted a peach-colored dress with a layer of
chiffon over the flowered skirt, the most beautiful piece of clothing Kya had ever seen,
prettier than Mas sundress. This dress is fit for a princess like you. She held it in front of
Kya, who touched it and smiled. Then, facing away from Jumpin, Mabel leaned over at
the middle with some effort and lifted a white bra from the box.
Kya felt heat all over.
Now, Miss Kya, dont be shy, hon. Ya be needin this bout now. And, child, if theres
ever anything ya need to talk to me about, anything ya dont understand, ya let ol Mabel
know. Ya heah?
Yesm. Thank you, Mabel. Kya tucked the bra deep in the box, under some jeans and
T-shirts, a bag of black-eyed peas, and a jar of put-up peaches.
A few weeks later, watching pelicans float and feed in the sea, her boat riding up and
down waves, Kyas stomach suddenly cramped up. Shed never been seasick, and this felt
different from any pain shed ever had. She pulled her boat ashore at Point Beach and sat
on the sand, legs folded to one side like a wing. The pain sharpened, and she grimaced,
made a little moan. She must have the runs coming.
Suddenly she heard the purr of a motor and saw Tates rig cutting through the whitecapped
surf. He turned inland the instant he saw her and made for shore. She spat out
some of Pas cussing. She always liked seeing Tate, but not when she might have to run
to the oak woods any second with diarrhea. After dragging his boat next to hers, he
plopped down on the sand beside her.
Hey, Kya. Whatre you doing? I was just going out to your place.
Hey, Tate. Its good to see you. She tried to sound normal, but her stomach twisted
tightly.
Whats wrong? he asked.
What do you mean?
You dont look good. Whats wrong?
I think Im sick. My stomachs cramping real hard.
Oh. Tate looked out over the sea. Dug his bare toes in the sand.
Maybe you should go, she said, head down.
Maybe I should stay till youre better. Suppose you cant get yourself home?
I might have to go to the woods. I might be sick.
Maybe. But I dont think thats going to help, he said quietly.
What do you mean? You dont know whats wrong with me.
Does this feel different from other stomachaches?
Yes.
Youre almost fifteen, right?
Yes. Whats that got to do with it?
He was quiet a minute. Shuffled his feet, digging his toes deeper in the sand. Looking
away from her, he said, It might be, you know, what happens to girls your age.
Remember, a few months ago I brought you a pamphlet about it. It was with those
biology books. Tate glanced at her briefly, his face blazing, and looked away again.
Kya dropped her eyes as her whole body blushed. Of course, thered been no Ma to tell
her, but indeed a school booklet Tate had brought explained some. Now her time had
come, and here she was sitting on the beach becoming a woman right in front of a boy.
Shame and panic filled her. What was she supposed to do? What exactly would happen?
How much blood would there be? She imagined it leaking into the sand around her. She
sat silent as a sharp pain racked her middle.
Can you get yourself home? he asked, still not looking at her.
I think so.
Itll be okay, Kya. Every girl goes through this just fine. You go on home. Ill follow
way back to make sure you get there.
You dont have to.
Dont worry about me. Now get going. He stood and walked to his boat, not looking
at her. He motored out and waited quite far offshore until she headed up coast toward
her channel. So far back he was just a speck, he followed until she reached her lagoon.
Standing on the bank, she waved briefly to him, her face down, not meeting his eyes.
Just as she had figured out most things, Kya figured out how to become a woman on
her own. But the next morning at first light, she boated over to Jumpins. A pale sun
seemed suspended in thick fog as she approached his wharf and looked for Mabel,
knowing there was little chance shed be there. Sure enough, only Jumpin walked out to
greet her.
Hi, Miss Kya. Ya needin gas aready?
Still sitting in the boat, Kya answered quietly, I need to see Mabel.
Im sorry as can be, child, Mabel aint here today. Can I help ya?
Head down low, she said, I need to see Mabel bad. Soon.
Well then. Jumpin looked across the small bay out to sea and saw no more boats
coming in. Anybody needing gas at any time of day and every day including Christmas
could count on Jumpin being herehe hadnt missed a single day in fifty years, except
when their baby angel, Daisy, died. He couldnt leave his post. Ya hang on there, Miss
Kya, I gonna run up the lane a ways, get some chillin to fetch Mabel. Any boat come in,
ya tell em Ill be right back.
I will. Thank you.
Jumpin hurried up the wharf and disappeared as Kya waited, glancing out in the bay
every few seconds, dreading another boat coming in. But in no time he was back, saying
some kids had gone to get Mabel; Kya should just wait a spell.
Jumpin busied himself unpacking packets of chewing tobacco on the shelves and
generally doing around. Kya stayed in her boat. Finally Mabel hurried across the boards,
which shook with her swing as if a small piano were being pushed down the wharf.
Carrying a paper bag, she didnt bellow out a greeting, as she would have otherwise, but
stood on the wharf above Kya and said quietly, Mornin, Miss Kya, whats all this bout,
child? Whats wrong, hon?
Kya dropped her head more, mumbled something Mabel couldnt hear.
Can ya get out of that boat, or should I get in there with ya?
Kya didnt answer, so Mabel, almost two hundred pounds worth, stepped one foot,
then the other into the small boat, which complained by bumping against the piling. She
sat down on the center bench, facing Kya at the stern.
Now, child, tell me whats wrong.
The two leaned their heads together, Kya whispering, and then Mabel pulled Kya right
over to her full bosom, hugging and rocking her. Kya was rigid at first, not accustomed to
yielding to hugs, but this didnt discourage Mabel, and finally Kya went limp and slumped
against the comfort of those pillows. After a while, Mabel leaned back and opened the
brown paper bag.
Well, I figured whats wrong, so I brought ya some things. And there, sitting in the
boat at Jumpins wharf, Mabel explained the details to Kya.
Now, Miss Kya, this aint nothin to be shamed of. It aint no curse, like folks say; this
heres the startin of all life, and only a woman can do it. Youre a woman now, baby.
  
WHEN KYA HEARD TATES BOAT the next afternoon, she hid in thick brambles and watched
him. For anyone to know her at all seemed strange enough, but now he knew about the
most personal and private occurrence of her life. Her cheeks burned at the thought of it.
She would hide until he left.
As he pulled onto the lagoon shore and stepped out of the boat, he carried a white box
tied up with string. Yo! Kya, where are you? he called. I brought petite cakes from
Parkers.
Kya had not tasted anything like cake for years. Tate lifted some books out of the
boat, so Kya moseyed out of the bushes behind him.
Oh, there you are. Look at this. He opened the box, and there, arranged neatly, were
little cakes, each only an inch square, covered in vanilla icing with a tiny pink rose
perched on the top. Come on, dig in.
Kya lifted one and, still not looking at Tate, bit into it. Then pushed the rest of it into
her mouth. Licked her fingers.
Here. Tate set the box next to their oak. Have all you want. Lets get started. I
brought a new book. And that was that. They went into the lessons, never uttering a
word about the other thing.
  
AUTUMN WAS COMING; the evergreens might not have noticed, but the sycamores did. They
flashed thousands of golden leaves across slate-gray skies. Late one afternoon, after the
lesson, Tate lingering when he should have left, he and Kya sat on a log in the woods.
She finally asked the question shed wanted to ask for months. Tate, I appreciate your
teaching me to read and all those things you gave me. But whyd you do it? Dont you
have a girlfriend or somebody like that?
Nahwell, sometimes I do. I had one, but not now. I like being out here in the quiet
and I like the way youre so interested in the marsh, Kya. Most people dont pay it any
attention except to fish. They think its wasteland that should be drained and developed.
People dont understand that most sea creaturesincluding the very ones they eatneed
the marsh.
He didnt mention how he felt sorry for her being alone, that he knew how the kids had
treated her for years; how the villagers called her the Marsh Girl and made up stories
about her. Sneaking out to her shack, running through the dark and tagging it, had
become a regular tradition, an initiation for boys becoming men. What did that say about
men? Some of them were already making bets about who would be the first to get her
cherry. Things that infuriated and worried him.
But that wasnt the main reason hed left feathers for Kya in the forest, or why he kept
coming to see her. The other words Tate didnt say were his feelings for her that seemed
tangled up between the sweet love for a lost sister and the fiery love for a girl. He
couldnt come close to sorting it out himself, but hed never been hit by a stronger wave.
A power of emotions as painful as pleasurable.
Poking a grass stalk down an ant hole, she finally asked, Wheres your ma?
A breeze wandered through the trees, gently shaking branches. Tate didnt answer.
You dont have to say nothing, she said.
Anything.
You dont have to say anything.
My mother and little sister died in a car wreck over in Asheville. My sisters name was
Carianne.
Oh. Im so sorry, Tate. I bet your ma was real nice and pretty.
Yes. Both of them were. He spoke to the ground, between his knees. Ive never
talked about it before. To anybody.
Me neither, Kya thought. Out loud she said, My ma walked off one day and didnt
come back. The mama deer always come back.
Well, at least you can hope she does. Mine wont come back for sure.
They were silent a moment, then Tate continued. I think . . . But he stopped, looked
away.
Kya looked at him, but he stared at the ground. Quiet.
She said, What? You think what? You can say anything to me.
Still he said nothing. From a patience born from knowing, she waited.
Finally, very softly he said, I think they went to Asheville to buy my birthday present.
There was this certain bike I wanted, had to have it. The Western Auto didnt carry them,
so I think they went to Asheville to buy that bike for me.
That doesnt make it your fault, she said.
I know, but it feels like my fault, Tate said. I dont even remember what kind of bike
it was.
Kya leaned closer to him, not enough to touch. But she felt a sensationalmost like
the space between their shoulders had shifted. She wondered if Tate felt it. She wanted
to lean in closer, just enough so their arms would gently brush together. To touch. And
wondered if Tate would notice.
And just at that second, the wind picked up, and thousands upon thousands of yellow
sycamore leaves broke from their life support and streamed across the sky. Autumn
leaves dont fall; they fly. They take their time and wander on this, their only chance to
soar. Reflecting sunlight, they swirled and sailed and fluttered on the wind drafts.
Tate sprang from the log and called to her, See how many leaves you can catch
before they hit the ground! Kya jumped up, and the two of them leapt and skipped
through curtains of falling leaves, reaching their arms wide, snatching them before they
fell to the earth. Laughing, Tate dived toward a leaf only inches from the ground, caught
it, and rolled over, holding his trophy in the air. Kya threw her hands up, releasing all the
leaves she had rescued back into the wind. As she ran back through them, they caught
like gold in her hair.
Then, as she whirled around, she bumped into Tate, who had stood, and they froze,
staring into each others eyes. They stopped laughing. He took her shoulders, hesitated
an instant, then kissed her lips, as the leaves rained and danced around them as silently
as snow.
She knew nothing about kissing and held her head and lips stiff. They broke away and
looked at each other, wondering where that had come from and what to do next. He
lifted a leaf gently from her hair and dropped it to the ground. Her heart beat wildly. Of
all the ragged loves shed known from wayward family, none had felt like this.
Am I your girlfriend now? she asked.
He smiled. Do you want to be?
Yes.
You might be too young, he said.
But I know feathers. I bet the other girls dont know feathers.
All right, then. And he kissed her again. This time she tilted her head to the side and
her lips softened. And for the first time in her life, her heart was full.
18.
White Canoe
1960
Now, every new word began with a squeal, every sentence a race. Tate grabbing Kya,
the two of them tumbling, half childlike, half not, through sourweed, red with autumn.
Be serious a second, he said. The only way to get multiplication tables is to
memorize them. He wrote 12  12 = 144 in the sand, but she ran past him, dived into
the breaking surf, down to the calm, and swam until he followed into a place where grayblue
light beams slanted through the quiet and highlighted their forms. Sleek as
porpoises. Later, sandy and salty, they rolled across the beach, arms tight around each
other as if they were one.
The next afternoon he motored into her lagoon but stayed in his boat after beaching. A
large basket covered in a red-checkered cloth sat at his feet.
Whats that? Whatd you bring? she asked.
A surprise. Go on, get in.
They flowed through the slow-moving channels into the sea, then south to a tiny halfmoon
bay. After wrist-flicking the blanket onto the sand, he placed the covered basket on
it, and as they sat, he lifted the cloth.
Happy birthday, Kya, he said. Youre fifteen. A two-tiered bakery cake, tall as a
hatbox and decorated with shells of pink icing, rose from the basket. Her name scripted
on top. Presents, wrapped in colorful paper and tied with bows, surrounded the cake.
She stared, flabbergasted, her mouth open. No one had wished her happy birthday
since Ma left. No one had ever given her a store-bought cake with her name on it. Shed
never had presents in real wrapping paper with ribbons.
Howd you know my birthday? Having no calendar, she had no idea it was today.
I read it in your Bible.
While she pleaded for him not to cut through her name, he sliced enormous pieces of
cake and plopped them on paper plates. Staring into each others eyes, they broke off
bites and stuffed them in their mouths. Smacking loudly. Licking fingers. Laughing
through icing-smeared grins. Eating cake the way it should be eaten, the way everybody
wants to eat it.
Want to open your presents? He smiled.
The first: a small magnifying glass, so you can see the fine details of insect wings.
Second: a plastic clasp, painted silver and decorated with a rhinestone seagull, for your
hair. Somewhat awkwardly, he pulled some locks behind her ear and clipped the
barrette in place. She touched it. More beautiful than Mas.
The last present was in a larger box, and Kya opened it to find ten jars of oil paint, tins
of watercolors, and different-sized brushes: for your paintings.
Kya picked up each color, each brush. I can get more when you need them. Even
canvas, from Sea Oaks.
She dipped her head. Thank you, Tate.
  
EASY DOES IT. Go slow, now, Scupper called out as Tate, surrounded by fishing nets, oil
rags, and preening pelicans, powered the winch. The bow of The Cherry Pie bobbled on
the cradle, gave a shudder, then glided onto the underwater rails at Petes Boat Yard, the
lopsided pier and rusted-out boathouse, the only haul-out in Barkley Cove.
Okay, good, shes on. Bring her out. Tate eased more power to the winch, and the
boat crawled up the track and into dry dock. They secured her in cables and set about
scraping blotchy barnacles from her hull as crystal-sharp arias of Miliza Korjus rose from
the record player. Theyd have to apply primer, then the annual coat of red paint. Tates
mother had chosen the color, and Scupper would never change it. Once in a while
Scupper stopped scraping and waved his large arms to the musics sinuous shape.
Now, early winter, Scupper paid Tate adult wages to work for him after school and on
weekends, but Tate couldnt get out to Kyas as much. He didnt mention this to his dad;
hed never mentioned anything about Kya to his dad.
They hacked at barnacles until dark, until even Scuppers arms burned. Im too tired
to cook, and I reckon you are, too. Lets grab some grub at the diner on the way home.
Nodding at everyone, there not being one person they didnt know, they sat at a corner
table. Both ordered the special: chicken-fried steak, mash and gravy, turnips, and
coleslaw. Biscuits. Pecan pie with ice cream. At the next table, a family of four joined
hands and lowered their heads as the father said a blessing out loud. At Amen they
kissed the air, squeezed hands, and passed the cornbread.
Scupper said, Now, son, I know this jobs keeping ya from things. Thats the way it is,
but you didnt go to the homecoming dance or anything last fall, and I dont want you to
miss all of it, this being your last year. Theres that big dance at the pavilion coming up.
You asking a girl?
Nah. I might go, not sure. But theres nobody I want to ask.
Theres not one single girl in school youd go with?
Nope.
Well then. Scupper leaned back as the waitress put down his plate of food. Thank
you, Betty. You sure heaped it up good. Betty moved around and set down Tates plate,
piled even higher.
Yall eat up now, she said. Thars more where this come from. The specials all-youcan-
eat. She smiled at Tate before walking with an extra hip-swing back to the kitchen.
Tate said, The girls at school are silly. All they talk about is hairdos and high heels.
Well now, thats what girls do. Sometimes you gotta take things as they are.
Maybe.
Now, son, I dont pay much mind to idle talk, never have done. But theres a regular
riptide of gossip saying youve got something going with that girl in the marsh. Tate
threw up his hands. Now hold on, hold on, Scupper continued. I dont believe all the
stories about her; shes probably nice. But take a care, son. You dont want to go starting
a family too early. You get my meaning, dont you?
Keeping his voice low, Tate hissed, First you say you dont believe those stories about
her, then you say I shouldnt start a family, showing you do believe shes that kind of girl.
Well, let me tell you something, shes not. Shes more pure and innocent than any of
those girls youd have me go to the dance with. Oh man, some of the girls in this town,
well, lets just say they hunt in packs, take no prisoners. And yes, Ive been going out to
see Kya some. You know why? Im teaching her how to read because people in this town
are so mean to her she couldnt even go to school.
Thats fine, Tate. Thats good of you. But please understand its my job to say things
like this. It may not be pleasant and all for us to talk about, but parents have to warn
their kids about things. Thats my job, so dont get huffy about it.
I know, Tate mumbled while buttering a biscuit. Feeling very huffy.
Come on now. Lets get another helping, then some of that pecan pie.
After the pie came, Scupper said, Well, since weve talked about things we never
mention, I might as well say something else on my mind.
Tate rolled his eyes at his pie.
Scupper continued. I want you to know, son, how proud I am of you. All on your own,
youve studied the marsh life, done real well at school, applied for college to get a degree
in science. And got accepted. Im just not the kind to speak on such things much. But Im
mighty proud of you, son. All right?
Yeah. All right.
Later in his room, Tate recited from his favorite poem:
Oh when shall I see the dusky Lake,
And the white canoe of my dear?
  
AROUND THE WORK, as best he could, Tate got out to Kyas, but could never stay long.
Sometimes boating forty minutes for a ten-minute beach walk, holding hands. Kissing a
lot. Not wasting a minute. Boating back. He wanted to touch her breasts; would kill just
to look at them. Lying awake at night, he thought of her thighs, how soft, yet firm, they
must be. To think beyond her thighs sent him roiling in the sheets. But she was so young
and timid. If he did things wrong, it might affect her somehow, then hed be worse than
the boys who only talked about snagging her. His desire to protect her was as strong as
the other. Sometimes.
  
ON EVERY TRIP TO KYAS, Tate took school or library books, especially on marsh creatures
and biology. Her progress was startling. She could read anything now, he said, and once
you can read anything you can learn everything. It was up to her. Nobodys come close
to filling their brains, he said. Were all like giraffes not using their necks to reach the
higher leaves.
Alone for hours, by the light of the lantern, Kya read how plants and animals change
over time to adjust to the ever-shifting earth; how some cells divide and specialize into
lungs or hearts, while others remain uncommitted as stem cells in case theyre needed
later. Birds sing mostly at dawn because the cool, moist air of morning carries their songs
and their meanings much farther. All her life, shed seen these marvels at eye level, so
natures ways came easily to her.
Within all the worlds of biology, she searched for an explanation of why a mother
would leave her offspring.
  
ONE COLD DAY, long after all the sycamore leaves had fallen, Tate stepped out of his boat
with a present wrapped in red-and-green paper.
I dont have anything for you, she said, as he held the present out for her. I didnt
know its Christmas.
Its not. He smiled. Not by a long shot, he lied. Come on, its not much.
Carefully she took the paper off to find a secondhand Websters dictionary. Oh, Tate,
thank you.
Look inside, he said. Tucked in the P section was a pelican feather, forget-me-not
blossoms pressed between two pages of the Fs, a dried mushroom under M. So many
treasures were stashed among the pages, the book would not completely close.
Ill try to come back the day after Christmas. Maybe I can bring a turkey dinner. He
kissed her good-bye. After he left, she swore out loud. Her first chance since Ma left to
give a gift to someone she loved, and shed missed it.
A few days later, shivering in the sleeveless, peach-colored chiffon dress, she waited
for Tate on the lagoon shore. Pacing, she clutched her present for hima head tuft from
a male cardinalwrapped in the paper he had used. As soon as he stepped out of his
boat, she stuck the present into his hands, insisting he open it there, so he did. Thank
you, Kya. I dont have one.
Her Christmas complete.
Now lets get you inside. You must be freezing in that dress. The kitchen was warm
from the woodstove, but still he suggested she change into a sweater and j